GAP: Guided Diffusion for
A Priori Transition State Sampling
Hyukjun Lim1∗†
Soojung Yang2∗
Lucas Pinède3∗†
Miguel Steiner2
Yuanqi Du4
Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli2
1Seoul National University
2MIT
3Chimie ParisTech, PSL University
4Cornell University
rafagb@mit.edu, soojungy@mit.edu
Abstract
Transition states, the first-order saddle points on high-dimensional potential energy
surfaces, govern the kinetics and thus the mechanisms of chemical reactions and
conformational changes. Thus, identifying them is a central challenge in molecular
simulations for physical and life sciences. Existing methods for locating them often
require knowledge about the transition, such as a good initial guess of the transition
pathway or reaction coordinates. We introduce ASTRA, A Priori Sampling of
TRAnsition States with Guided Diffusion, a workflow that reframes this search
problem as a direct generative task. ASTRA utilizes a score-based diffusion model
trained exclusively on configurations from known metastable states, requiring
no prior data from the transition region or prior information about the reaction
coordinate. During inference, ASTRA guides the generative process to draw
samples from the isodensity surface that separates the basis of stable states with
a principled composition of conditional scores. This process is coupled with a
Score-Aligned Ascent mechanism that maximizes the energy along the score-based
reaction coordinate approximation, effectively collapsing the sampling onto the
transition state ensemble. We validate our approach on a series of benchmarks,
from 2D potentials to the high-dimensional conformational changes of alanine
dipeptide, the folding of the chignolin protein, and a chemical reaction. Our results
demonstrate that ASTRA not only locates transition states with high precision but
also discovers competing reaction pathways in mechanistic studies.
1
Introduction
Understanding and predicting the dynamics of molecular systems, from chemical reactions to protein
folding, is fundamentally dependent on characterizing their transition states (TS) Eyring [1935],
Wigner [1938]. These states, defined as first-order saddle points on the potential energy surface
(PES), represent the highest energy configurations along a minimum energy path and act as the
kinetic bottlenecks that determine reaction rates and mechanisms. Despite their central importance,
locating transition states is a notoriously difficult problem. Their short lives and scarcity make them
experimentally elusive and computationally expensive to locate, requiring specialized algorithms to
navigate complex, high-dimensional landscapes.
Over the past decade, there have been major advances in the development of systematic TS optimiza-
tion campaigns across diverse chemical systems Dewyer and Zimmerman [2017], Simm et al. [2018],
Unsleber and Reiher [2020], Baiardi et al. [2022], Ismail et al. [2022], Wen et al. [2023], Margraf
et al. [2023], Steiner and Reiher [2022]. However, these methods remain computationally intensive
∗Equal contribution.
†Work done at MIT.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) Workshop: AI for Accelerated
Materials Discovery.
and the underlying algorithms often require chemically informed initial guesses of reaction pathways
or TS structures that are difficult to generalize across different chemical systems.
Data-driven transferable models can bypass this need for prior knowledge of the system, but their
applicability is limited to domains where large curated datasets of known transition states Pattanaik
et al. [2020], Duan et al. [2023], Kim et al. [2024] or connected minima Nam et al. [2025] are
available for training. Recent alternatives that sample reaction paths with diffusion models Raja et al.
[2025] rely on accurately learning the PES near the TS, limiting their utility for unexplored systems.
To address these respective limitations of classical and data-driven methods, we introduce A Priori
Sampling of TRAnsition States with Guided Diffusion (ASTRA), a workflow that integrates genera-
tive sampling with optimization steps based on physical forces to achieve robust generalizability. Our
approach combines recent advances in generative machine learning with principles from computa-
tional chemistry. The central idea is that a useful initial guess of the TS ensemble can be inferred from
the learned probability distributions of the surrounding metastable states, i.e., reactants and products.
ASTRA employs a single, conditionally trained score-based diffusion model that learns the data
manifold of metastable states Song et al. [2020], Ho and Salimans [2022]. At inference, we guide the
reverse diffusion process to sample configurations on the dividing surface where the probability of
belonging to either state is equal. This is achieved through a principled composition of the conditional
scores with the method introduced in Ref. 18, which we term Score-Based Interpolation (SBI).
These samples are then refined by force-based updates on the PES, ascending along the reaction
coordinate and descending along orthogonal directions, leveraging our second key insight that the
reaction coordinate can be effectively approximated from the conditional diffusion scores. This
process, which we call Score-Aligned Ascent (SAA), alleviates the need for the diffusion model to
perfectly learn the PES. Crucially, this entire process is carried out a priori, without any knowledge
or training data from the transition region itself.
Our contributions are threefold: (1) We propose a workflow for direct TS sampling that leverages
guided diffusion, eliminating the need for path-finding algorithms or prior TS data. (2) We introduce
the combination of Score-Based Interpolation and Score-Aligned Ascent as a principled mechanism
for guiding a diffusion process to sample first-order saddle points. (3) We show that ASTRA
successfully identifies known transition states and competing pathways in systems ranging from 2D
potentials to high-dimensional chemical systems.
2
Method
2.1
Score-Based Interpolation of Diffusion Models
Our objective is to infer the TS, given MD data of each metastable state. First, we annotate each data
point with its metastable state c and train a denoising score matching model [Song et al., 2020], with
Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) [Ho and Salimans, 2022]. The model learns to approximate both the
conditional, ∇log pt(x|c), and unconditional score function ∇x log pt(x) that can be used to sample
from the reverse process stochastic differential equation (SDE):
dx = [f(x, τ) −g(τ)2∇log pt(x|c)dτ + g(τ)d ¯w,
(1)
from a randomly initialized xτ ∼N(0, I). The scores are parametrized by the CFG-based score
sc
θ(x, t) ≈∇log pt(x|c), given by extrapolation:
sc
θ(x, t) = sθ(x, t, ∅) + γ(sθ(x, t, c) −sθ(x, t, ∅)),
(2)
where c is the condition, replaced by a null token ∅for the unconditional score, and γ is the guidance
scale that controls the strength of conditioning.
Our key intuition is that the TS region can be effectively sampled by interpolating between the learned
conditional scores of the two metastable states, A and B. We formulate this using a combined score
function for the reverse SDE:
scomb
θ
(x, t) = sB
θ(x, t) + κ(sA
θ (x, t) −sB
θ(x, t)),
(3)
where the interpolation weight κ controls the contribution of each state’s score. We propose two
strategies for determining κ: Isodensity Interpolation (II) and Simple Averaging (SA). The II
approach is inspired by the Superposition of Diffusion Models (SuperDiff) AND operator, specifically
2
designed to sample the equal density region between states [Skreta et al., 2024]. The SA approach
provides a simpler baseline by directly averaging the two conditional scores, which corresponds to
setting κ = 0.5 [Liu et al., 2022].
2.2
Score-Aligned Ascent for Saddle Point Search
To further refine the TS samples and push them towards the true saddle point, we propose the Score-
Aligned Ascent (SAA) algorithm. Transition states are first-order saddle points on a multi-dimensional
potential energy surface (PES). Locating a transition state corresponds to an optimization problem,
where the energy needs to be maximized along the given transformation often referred to as the
reaction coordinate r, and minimized in all orthogonal directions. This is achieved by decomposing
the negative energy gradient (−∇U(x)) into components parallel and perpendicular to the reaction
coordinate. We then invert the parallel component to create an ascent force that pushes the system
uphill along r, while preserving the original components that minimize the energy in all orthogonal
directions. This operation yields the idealized SAA force: F = −∇U(x) + 2(∇U(x) · r)r/∥r∥2
2.
This force projection-based optimization to find the saddle point has been introduced in Henkelman
and Jónsson [1999]. One of our key findings is that we can dynamically approximate r at each step
by taking the difference of scores conditioned on each states: rSAA = sB
θ(x, t) −sA
θ (x, t). This vector
naturally points from one metastable state to the other (see Appendix D).
Summarizing the workflow, we first solve the reverse-time SDE with interpolated score up to a
chosen fixed timestep close to the SDE endpoint to ensure reliable force calculation, pause the
reverse SDE process, and use FSAA = −∇U(x) + 2(∇U(x) · rSAA)rSAA/∥rSAA∥2
2 to optimize the
configurations. We then resume the reverse SDE sampling, which corrects nonphysical configurations
(see Algorithm 1).
3
Experiments and Results
3.1
Validation on 2D Model Potentials
(a) Müller-Brown potential.
(b) Double-path potential.
Figure 1: Our method (ASTRA) simultaneously discovers multiple transition states on two benchmark
potentials, (a) Müller-Brown and (b) double-path potential.
Müller-Brown Potential.
The Müller-Brown potential is a common two-dimensional benchmark
for evaluating transition state (TS) search algorithms. Its energy surface features three local minima
connected by two first-order saddle points, offering a controlled environment to assess a method’s
ability to identify distinct transition pathways. For our analysis, we assigned the two lowest-energy
minima as the initial and final states (State A and State B in Figure 1a). Despite this setup, the
ASTRA algorithm successfully locates configurations clustering around both accessible transition
states connecting A and B. Ablation studies shown in Figure 6 indicate that this ability to discover
multiple, topologically distinct saddle points is primarily driven by the Score-Aligned Ascent (SAA)
component of our method.
Double-Path Potential.
We next evaluated our method’s robustness on a synthetic 2D potential
engineered to possess two topologically distinct transition pathways connecting the same reactant and
3
product states. As shown in Figure 1b, the ASTRA algorithm successfully identifies and populates
both TS regions corresponding to the two competing pathways. This simultaneous discovery of
distinct reaction channels, achieved without any explicit path-based guidance, demonstrates a key
advantage of our method. Whereas traditional algorithms are designed to converge to a single
pathway, our approach can explore the entire TS manifold, thereby providing mechanistic insights
into complex energy landscapes that are often inaccessible to conventional techniques or avoids being
trapped in local maxima that are irrelevant for the studied chemical process.
3.2
Application to Chemical Systems
(a) Alanine dipeptide conformational change.
(b) Chignolin folding.
Figure 2: Application to chemical systems of (a) Alanine dipeptide conformational change, and (b)
Chignolin folding.
Alanine Dipeptide.
This system involves a 22-atom molecule implying a high dimensional config-
uration space. The conformational landscape of alanine dipeptide is conventionally analyzed through
its Ramachandran plot, defined by the dihedral angles ϕ and ψ. We focus on the isomerization
between the two conformational states, the C5 and C7ax conformations, which are separated by
multiple free energy barriers [Chekmarev et al., 2004]. The configurations generated by our algorithm
lie in three narrow regions on the Ramachandran plot. The agreement with reference data is validated
by a narrow distribution of committor values around 0.5, calculated by running short Langevin
Dynamics simulations from the samples, as shown in Figure 2a and 10. Both Figure 2a and 10
demonstrate a peaked distribution of committor values around 0.5, validating our method.
Chignolin.
We conclude our experiments by studying coarse-grained chignolin, a 10-residue
fast-folding protein with multiple competing folding pathways, and transition timescales spanning
microseconds, using the DESRES dataset [Lindorff-Larsen et al., 2011]. To visualize the ASTRA-
generated configurations we project them onto the two-dimensional space of time-lagged independent
components (TICA) [Molgedey and Schuster, 1994, Pérez-Hernández et al., 2013]. We compute the
committor values with an ML model trained by Kang et al. [2024]. Figure 2b and 11 demonstrates
that ASTRA samples concentrate along the q ≈0.5 isosurface, providing quantitative and qualitative
confirmation of our method. Crucially, the samples resolve into two distinct clusters, consistent with
the two known competing reaction pathways termed TSdown and TSup, shown in Figure 14.
4
Conclusion
We introduce ASTRA, a workflow that reconceptualizes TS sampling as a direct generative modeling
task by leveraging a score-based model conditioned on known metastable states. Our method
composes learned distributions with Score-Based Interpolation to target directly the dividing surface
of equal probability density, while Score-Aligned Ascent provides a mechanism based on physical
forces to guide sampling. This approach successfully locates transition state regions with high
precision and discovers competing reaction pathways in biomolecular systems, as demonstrated on
alanine dipeptide and chignolin. Future work will focus on testing this workflow to larger systems
with production-level force fields and navigating more complex reaction networks with multiple
intermediate states.
4
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This paper was supported by Korea Institute for Advancement of Technology(KIAT) grant
funded by the Korea Government(Ministry of Education)(P0025681-G02P22450002201-10054408,
Semiconductor-Specialized University)
References
Henry Eyring. The activated complex in chemical reactions. The Journal of chemical physics, 3(2):
107–115, 1935.
Eugene Wigner. The transition state method. Transactions of the Faraday Society, 34:29–41, 1938.
Amanda L Dewyer and Paul M Zimmerman. Finding Reaction Mechanisms, Intuitive or Otherwise.
Org. Biomol. Chem., 15(3):501–504, 2017. doi: 10.1039/C6OB02183B.
Gregor N Simm, Alain C Vaucher, and Markus Reiher. Exploration of Reaction Pathways and
Chemical Transformation Networks. J. Phys. Chem. A, 2018.
Jan P. Unsleber and Markus Reiher. The Exploration of Chemical Reaction Networks. Annu. Rev.
Phys. Chem., 71(1):121–142, 2020. doi: 10.1146/annurev-physchem-071119-040123.
Alberto Baiardi, Stephanie A. Grimmel, Miguel Steiner, Paul L. Türtscher, Jan P. Unsleber, Thomas
Weymuth, and Markus Reiher. Expansive Quantum Mechanical Exploration of Chemical Reaction
Paths. Acc. Chem. Res., 55(1):35–43, 2022. doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.1c00472.
Idil Ismail, Raphael Chantreau Majerus, and Scott Habershon. Graph-Driven Reaction Discovery:
Progress, Challenges, and Future Opportunities. J. Phys. Chem. A, 126(40):7051–7069, 2022. doi:
10.1021/acs.jpca.2c06408.
Mingjian Wen, Evan Walter Clark Spotte-Smith, Samuel M. Blau, Matthew J. McDermott, Aditi S.
Krishnapriyan, and Kristin A. Persson. Chemical reaction networks and opportunities for machine
learning. Nat. Comput. Sci., 3(1):12–24, 2023. doi: 10.1038/s43588-022-00369-z.
Johannes T. Margraf, Hyunwook Jung, Christoph Scheurer, and Karsten Reuter. Exploring Catalytic
Reaction Networks with Machine Learning. Nat. Catal., 6(2):112–121, 2023. doi: 10.1038/
s41929-022-00896-y.
Miguel Steiner and Markus Reiher. Autonomous reaction network exploration in homogeneous and
heterogeneous catalysis. Top. Catal., 65(1):6–39, 2022.
Lagnajit Pattanaik, John B Ingraham, Colin A Grambow, and William H Green. Generating transition
states of isomerization reactions with deep learning. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 22
(41):23618–23626, 2020.
Chenru Duan, Yuanqi Du, Haojun Jia, and Heather J Kulik. Accurate transition state generation with
an object-aware equivariant elementary reaction diffusion model. Nature computational science, 3
(12):1045–1055, 2023.
Seonghwan Kim, Jeheon Woo, and Woo Youn Kim. Diffusion-based generative ai for exploring
transition states from 2d molecular graphs. Nature Communications, 15(1):341, 2024.
Juno Nam, Miguel Steiner, Max Misterka, Soojung Yang, Avni Singhal, and Rafael Gómez-
Bombarelli. Transferable learning of reaction pathways from geometric priors. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.15370, 2025.
Sanjeev Raja, Martin Šípka, Michael Psenka, Tobias Kreiman, Michal Pavelka, and Aditi S Krish-
napriyan. Action-minimization meets generative modeling: Efficient transition path sampling with
the onsager-machlup functional. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.18506, 2025.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
5
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598,
2022.
Marta Skreta, Lazar Atanackovic, Joey Bose, Alexander Tong, and Kirill Neklyudov. The superposi-
tion of diffusion models using the itô density estimator. In The Thirteenth International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2024.
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
generation with composable diffusion models. In European conference on computer vision, pages
423–439. Springer, 2022.
Graeme Henkelman and Hannes Jónsson.
A dimer method for finding saddle points on high
dimensional potential surfaces using only first derivatives. J. Chem. Phys., 111(15):7010–7022,
1999.
Dmitriy S Chekmarev, Tateki Ishida, and Ronald M Levy. Long-time conformational transitions of
alanine dipeptide in aqueous solution: Continuous and discrete-state kinetic models. The Journal
of Physical Chemistry B, 108(50):19487–19495, 2004.
Kresten Lindorff-Larsen, Stefano Piana, Ron O Dror, and David E Shaw. How fast-folding proteins
fold. Science, 334(6055):517–520, 2011.
Lutz Molgedey and Heinz Georg Schuster. Separation of a mixture of independent signals using time
delayed correlations. Physical review letters, 72(23):3634, 1994.
Guillermo Pérez-Hernández, Fabian Paul, Toni Giorgino, Gianni De Fabritiis, and Frank Noé.
Identification of slow molecular order parameters for markov model construction. The Journal of
chemical physics, 139(1), 2013.
Peilin Kang, Enrico Trizio, and Michele Parrinello. Computing the committor with the committor to
study the transition state ensemble. Nature Computational Science, 4(6):451–460, 2024.
Chenru Duan, Guan-Horng Liu, Yuanqi Du, Tianrong Chen, Qiyuan Zhao, Haojun Jia, Carla P
Gomes, Evangelos A Theodorou, and Heather J Kulik. Optimal transport for generating transition
states in chemical reactions. Nature Machine Intelligence, 7(4):615–626, 2025.
Haibo Wang, Yuxuan Qiu, Yanze Wang, Rob Brekelmans, and Yuanqi Du. Generalized flow matching
for transition dynamics modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.15128, 2024.
Yilun Du, Conor Durkan, Robin Strudel, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Sander Dieleman, Rob Fergus, Jascha
Sohl-Dickstein, Arnaud Doucet, and Will Sussman Grathwohl. Reduce, reuse, recycle: Composi-
tional generation with energy-based diffusion models and mcmc. In International conference on
machine learning, pages 8489–8510. PMLR, 2023.
Marta Skreta, Tara Akhound-Sadegh, Viktor Ohanesian, Roberto Bondesan, Alan Aspuru-Guzik, Ar-
naud Doucet, Rob Brekelmans, Alexander Tong, and Kirill Neklyudov. Feynman-kac correctors in
diffusion: Annealing, guidance, and product of experts. In Forty-second International Conference
on Machine Learning, 2025.
Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, Michael T Mccann, Marc L Klasky, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusion
posterior sampling for general noisy inverse problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14687, 2022.
Cheng Lu, Huayu Chen, Jianfei Chen, Hang Su, Chongxuan Li, and Jun Zhu. Contrastive energy
prediction for exact energy-guided diffusion sampling in offline reinforcement learning.
In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 22825–22855. PMLR, 2023.
Luhuan Wu, Brian Trippe, Christian Naesseth, David Blei, and John P Cunningham. Practical and
asymptotically exact conditional sampling in diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36:31372–31403, 2023.
Jiajun He, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato, Yuanqi Du, and Francisco Vargas. Rne: a plug-and-
play framework for diffusion density estimation and inference-time control.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.05668, 2025.
6
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learning,
pages 2256–2265. pmlr, 2015.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
RA Olsen, GJ Kroes, G Henkelman, A Arnaldsson, and H Jónsson. Comparison of methods for
finding saddle points without knowledge of the final states. J. Chem. Phys., 121(20):9776–9792,
2004.
Andreas Heyden, Alexis T Bell, and Frerich J Keil. Efficient methods for finding transition states
in chemical reactions: Comparison of improved dimer method and partitioned rational function
optimization method. The Journal of chemical physics, 123(22), 2005.
Johannes Kästner and Paul Sherwood. Superlinearly converging dimer method for transition state
search. The Journal of chemical physics, 128(1), 2008.
Cheng Shang and Zhi-Pan Liu. Constrained broyden minimization combined with the dimer method
for locating transition state of complex reactions. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, 6
(4):1136–1144, 2010.
Yi-Lun Liao, Brandon Wood, Abhishek Das, and Tess Smidt. Equiformerv2: Improved equivariant
transformer for scaling to higher-degree representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12059, 2023.
Marloes Arts, Victor Garcia Satorras, Chin-Wei Huang, Daniel Zugner, Marco Federici, Cecilia
Clementi, Frank Noé, Robert Pinsler, and Rianne van den Berg. Two for one: Diffusion models and
force fields for coarse-grained molecular dynamics. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation,
19(18):6151–6159, 2023.
Jim Lawrence, Javier Bernal, and Christoph Witzgall. A purely algebraic justification of the kabsch-
umeyama algorithm. Journal of research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology,
124:1, 2019.
Xiaolei Zhu, Keiran C Thompson, and Todd J Martínez. Geodesic interpolation for reaction pathways.
The Journal of Chemical Physics, 150(16), 2019.
7
A
Related Works
A.1
Machine Learning for Transition State Search
Numerous machine learning approaches have been developed to study rare events and in particular
transition search. Early works leveraged a dataset of accumulated transition states to train generative
models [Pattanaik et al., 2020] with diffusion models [Duan et al., 2023, Kim et al., 2024] and flow
matching [Duan et al., 2025]. However, to alleviate the requirement of creating a transition state
dataset, later works aimed to leverage geometric optimization and energy evaluations during training
to find transition paths and extract transition states from it [Nam et al., 2025]. Wang et al. [2024]
also leveraged the metric induced by local molecular dynamics simulation to learn a generalized flow
matching model, while Raja et al. [2025] relied on the learned forcefield from pre-trained diffusion
models with the Onsager–Machlup functional to approximate the transition path.
A.2
Inference-time Control for Diffusion Models
Diffusion models excel at generating high-quality data, spanning images, texts to molecular structures.
Beyond sampling from the learned distribution, they can be guided to generate from modified
target distributions that encode design objectives, constraints, or rewards. The early and well-
known examples are classifier guidance and classifier-free guidance to sample from conditional
distributions [Ho and Salimans, 2022]. Later on, inference-time control has been extended to
compositional, reward-tilted, annealed, equal density distributions and more [Du et al., 2023, Skreta
et al., 2024, 2025]. One popular branch of methods develop upon the heuristics and approximate
guidance [Chung et al., 2022]. Another branch of methods study exact guidance where expensive
Monte Carlo (MC) estimations are required [Lu et al., 2023]. Recently, sequential Monte Carlo
methods have become relevant to reweight on path space to reduce the variance of inference-time
control [Wu et al., 2023, Skreta et al., 2025, He et al., 2025].
B
Background
B.1
Score-Based Diffusion Models
Given a forward process that transforms a data distribution p0(x0) over a continuous time variable
t ∈[0, T] into a known prior distribution pT (xT ), typically the standard Normal distribution N(0, I),
a diffusion model sθ(x, t) can be trained such that a reverse process transforms samples from the
prior distribution to the data distribution [Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015]. The model can learn the added
noise in each time step t [Ho et al., 2020] or the gradient of the log-probability of the data distribution
∇x log pt(x), the so-called score function [Song and Ermon, 2019]. Both training strategies can be
related as discretizing the same continuous reverse process described by the stochastic differential
equation (SDE)
dx = [f(x, τ) −g(τ)2∇x log pτ(x)]dτ + g(τ)d ¯w,
(4)
where f(x, t) is the drift coefficient, g(t) is the diffusion coefficient, ¯w is a reverse Wiener process,
and the reverse time τ ∈[T, 0] [Song et al., 2020]. Once the model sθ(x, t) is trained, it can be
applied as a generative model by initializing the reverse SDE with noise xτ ∼N(0, I) and solving it
numerically.
B.2
Classifier-Free Guidance
Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) [Ho and Salimans, 2022] is a technique for conditional generation
that trains a single diffusion model to handle both conditional and unconditional generation scenarios.
The model is trained to predict the score of the data distribution, conditioned on the label c ∈
{C1, C2, ..., ∅}. During training, the conditioning information is randomly dropped with a given
probability pdrop. This technique enables the single model to learn both the conditional score
functions, ∇log pt(x|c), for each label, and the unconditional score function, ∇log pt(x), over the
entire data manifold. During inference, the CFG-based score sc
θ(x, t) is given by interpolation
sc
θ(x, t) = sθ(x, t, ∅) + γ(sθ(x, t, c) −sθ(x, t, ∅)),
(5)
where sθ(x, t, c) is the conditional score, sθ(x, t, ∅) is the unconditional score, where the condition c
is replaced by a null token ∅, and γ is the guidance scale that controls the strength of conditioning.
8
This approach provides fine-grained control over conditioning strength without requiring separately
trained conditional models.
B.3
Superposition of Diffusion Models
The Superposition of Diffusion Models (SuperDiff) [Skreta et al., 2024] provides a principled way
to combine the score functions from multiple models, each trained on a different data distribution.
Given two score models, sA and sB, trained on distributions pA and pB respectively, a composite
score function can be constructed by a weighted average:
scomb
θ
(x, t) = sB
θ(x, t) + κ(sA
θ (x, t) −sB
θ(x, t)).
(6)
The interpolation factor κ(t) determines the nature of the composition, enabling the generation of
samples from distributions that represent logical combinations of the base distributions. For example,
setting κ(t) based on the relative likelihoods of a sample under each model can produce samples
from the union (OR) of the distributions, while setting κ based on equal likelihoods can produce
samples from the intersection (AND). In the context of transition state sampling, we are interested in
the latter and a κ(t) that satisfies the equal density:
d log pA
t (x) = d log pB
t (x)
(7)
can be found by solving a set of three linear equations [Skreta et al., 2024]. As a comparison, we
also include in our ablations Simple Averaging of the scores to interpolate and steer the diffusion
process [Liu et al., 2022].
B.4
Local mode maximization
Transition states are first-order saddle points on a multi-dimensional potential energy surface (PES).
Localizing a transition state corresponds to an optimization problem, where the energy needs to
be maximized along the given transformation and minimized in all orthogonal directions. If the
mode of transformation r, commonly referred to as reaction coordinate, is known, a gradient-based
optimization to the transition state can be achieved with a sufficiently close start condition. The
optimization is driven by the step ∆xi that is determined by the gradient of the potential energy with
respect to nuclear coordinates g(x)
∆xi = −g(x) + 2
 g(x)T r

r.
(8)
However, the definition of r is non-trivial for a given chemical system. Existing approaches, such
as the Dimer algorithm Henkelman and Jónsson [1999], Olsen et al. [2004], Heyden et al. [2005],
Kästner and Sherwood [2008], Shang and Liu [2010], find local approximations to r by locating the
direction of least curvature with gradient calculations for multiple close-lying configurations on the
PES.
C
Additional Details on Experiments
For all systems, we train a score-based diffusion model on a dataset containing metastable state
configurations, and apply our ASTRA algorithm to identify the TS ensemble. For chemical systems,
we report the committor function value (q) which gives the probability that a trajectory starting from
a given state will reach one metastable state before reaching another metastable state.
1D PES Example.
The 1D PES example is a simple potential with two distinct states. The analytical
formula for this potential energy surface is given by:
V (x) = 0.1x4 −x2 + 0.1x + 1.0
(9)
Müller-Brown Potential.
For the Müller-Brown potential, our methodology adheres to the training
procedure detailed in Raja et al. [2025]. A score-based diffusion model was trained on the ‘tiny’
subset of the provided dataset, which consists of 4,000 samples. The two metastable states, A and B,
are defined by the coordinate criteria y < 20 and y > 20, respectively.
9
The analytical surface of this system is defined as:
V (x, y) =
4
X
i=1
Ai exp

αi(x −ai)2 + βi(x −ai)(y −bi) + γi(y −bi)2
(10)
with the parameters taken directly from the simulation code:
A = 10 × barrier × [−1.73, −0.87, −1.47, 0.13]
α = 10−2 × [−0.39, −0.39, −2.54, 0.273]
a = [48, 32, 24, 16]
β = 10−2 × [0, 0, 4.30, 0.23]
b = [8, 16, 32, 24]
γ = 10−2 × [−3.91, −3.91, −2.54, 0.273]
where ‘barrier‘ is a scaling factor for the height of the potential barrier, for which we used 1.0.
Double-Path Example.
For the double-path potential, the dataset was generated via Langevin
Dynamics simulations, following the procedure outlined in Raja et al. [2025]. A score-based diffusion
model was subsequently trained on a curated subset of these simulation data, with 4,000 samples.
State A and B are defined by the regions x < 0 and x > 0, respectively.
The analytical formula for the potential energy surface is given by:
V (x, y) = 10

2 + 4
3x4 −2y2 + y4 + 10
3 x2(y2 −1)

+ 7 exp

−(x + 0.7)2 + (y −0.8)2
0.42

+ exp

−(x −1.0)2 + (y + 0.3)2
0.42

−6 exp

−(x + 1.0)2 + (y + 0.6)2
0.42

(11)
(a) Alanine dipeptide.
(b) Chignolin.
Figure 3: Potential Energy Surface (PES) of alanine dipeptide and chignolin.
Alanine Dipeptide.
We generate the dataset by running Langevin Dynamics from each state
(C5 and C7ax) for 500 ps with a 1 fs time step saving every 10 steps. We then slice parts of the
trajectory that covers the widest region in Ramachandran space (ϕ, ψ) and subsample randomly 2.5k
configurations for each of the two states. In Figure 3a, we show the PES of alanine dipeptide. We
propagate the dynamics using a custom force field taken from Raja et al. [2025] at T=300K. We
then train a diffusion model based on the EquiformerV2 architecture [Liao et al., 2023] with up
10
to L=2 representations, four attention heads and 64 channels. The radius graph is computed with
rcutoff = 5.0 Angstrom. We use the AdamW optimizer with a constant learning rate 6.10−4, 0.001
weight decay. We use an 0.999 Exponential Moving Average (EMA) decay with an effective batch
size of 128, and train for 500 epochs. For diffusion, we leverage the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Model framework (DDPM) with 1000 time steps and a cosine schedule [Ho et al., 2020]. For SAA,
we use 1000 optimization steps by Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.01, β1 = 0.0, and
β2 = 0.999.
The committor probabilities are computed from 100 configurations sampled from the method. We
first run a 2 ps long simulation and filter out all the configurations leading to instability that are
labelled as non physical. For all reported results, more than 98% of samples were kept and used
for the committor calculations. We compute the committor probabilities by running 100 replicas
stochastic Langevin Dynamics with randomly initialized velocities using the same force field that
generated the dataset to stay consistent with the PES distribution. The simulations are run for 1 ps
with 1 fs at T=300K. We define each state limits and record the region first reach for each replica to
compute the probability of reaching one state or the other.
Chignolin.
For our analysis of Chignolin, which is one of the fast-folding proteins, we employed the
DRSRES coarse-grained (CG) dataset [Lindorff-Larsen et al., 2011]. In Figure 3b, we show the PES
of chignolin training dataset. We removed all the conformations with ML committor value between
0.0001 and 0.9999 in the training dataset. Our conditional diffusion model is an adaptation of the
pre-trained architecture from Arts et al. [2023]. We finetuned this base model to enable conditional
generation by incorporating a group embedding that specifies the state, i.e., folded or unfolded, at the
beginning of the forward process. Sampling was then performed using SAA hyperparameters with
100 optimization steps, a learning rate of 0.0005, and a pause ratio of 0.05. Finally, the generated
configurations were validated by computing their committor probabilities with the machine-learned
committor predictor model from Kang et al. [2024].
11
D
Validation of Score Difference Approximation to Reaction Coordinate
To validate the claim that the score difference approximates the reaction coordinate, i.e., sA(x, t) −
sB(x, t) ≈r, we compare the two vectors in Figure 4. The visualization shows strong alignment
between our approximation (blue arrows) and the true reaction coordinate (red arrows). This is
quantified by the high average cosine similarity: 0.9275 on the Müller-Brown potential and 0.9584
on the Double-Path example.
(a) Müller-Brown Potential.
(b) Double-Path Example.
Figure 4: Validation of Score Difference Approximation. The score difference vector (red) closely
aligns with the true reaction coordinate (blue) on (a) the Müller-Brown potential and (b) a Double-
Path example.
12
E
ASTRA Sampling Algorithm
Algorithm 1 Sampling with Score-Based Interpolation and Score-Aligned Ascent
Require: Denoising model ϵθ(xt, t, c) with classifier-free guidance; Energy-based force field F(x);
Total number of time steps T; Guidance pause time step Tpause; Number of optimization steps
Nopt; Optimizer hyperparameters Θopt.
Output: Sampled molecular conformation x0.
1: function SBI_COMBINE(xt, t)
2:
Compute conditional noise estimates: ϵA
t ←ϵθ(xt, t, A), ϵB
t ←ϵθ(xt, t, B).
3:
Compute the interpolation factor: κt ←SBI(ϵA
t , ϵB
t , xt, t).
4:
Combine noise estimates: ϵcomb ←ϵB
t + κt(ϵA
t −ϵB
t ).
5:
return ϵcomb, ϵA
t , ϵB
t
6: end function
7: Initialize positions xT ∼N(0, I).
// Phase 1: Denoising with Score-Based Interpolation
8: for t ←T, Tpause + 1 do
9:
ϵcomb, _, _ ←SBI_Combine(xt, t)
10:
Perform one reverse diffusion step to obtain xt−1 from xt and ϵcomb.
11: end for
// Phase 2: Score-Aligned Ascent Optimization at latent time Tpause
12: Let z ←xTpause. Initialize an optimizer O with Θopt.
13: for k ←1, Nopt do
14:
ϵcomb, ϵA
Tpause, ϵB
Tpause ←SBI_Combine(xTpause, Tpause)
15:
Approximate the reaction coordinate: rSAA ←ϵB
Tpause −ϵA
Tpause.
16:
Predict the clean sample: ˆx0 ←predict_x0(z, Tpause, ϵcomb).
17:
Evaluate the force from the external field: f ←FF(ˆx0).
18:
Compute the Score-Aligned Ascent force: FSAA ←f −2 f·rSAA
∥rSAA∥2
2 rSAA.
19:
Update positions with gradient descent: z ←O(z, ∇zL), where ∇zL = −fSAA.
20: end for
21: xTpause ←z.
// Phase 3: Resumed Denoising
22: for t ←Tpause, 1 do
23:
ϵcomb, _, _ ←SBI_Combine(xt, t)
24:
Perform one reverse diffusion step to obtain xt−1 from xt and ϵcomb.
25: end for
return x0.
13
F
Additional Figures for Ablation Study
F.1
Effect of Score-Based Interpolation and Score-Aligned Ascent
F.1.1
1D PES Example
We first investigate the effects of Score-Based Interpolation and Score-Aligned Ascent on a one-
dimensional potential energy surface, with the results presented in Figure 5. When employing simple
averaging for interpolation, it fails to capture the true transition state, instead averaging points to a
higher energy region. In contrast, isodensity interpolation generates samples that more accurately
close to the true transition state. The introduction of score-aligned ascent further refines these
results. For both interpolation methods, score-aligned ascent pushes the diffusion process towards TS
regions, correcting deviations and ensuring the final states closely align with the true TS. Notably,
the combination of isodensity interpolation and score-aligned ascent yields the most accurate and
physically meaningful transition path.
(a) Isodensity Interpolation.
(b) Simple Averaging.
(c) Isodensity Interpolation + Score-Aligned Ascent.
(d) Simple Averaging + Score-Aligned Ascent.
Figure 5: Impact of Score-Based Interpolation and Score-Aligned Ascent on 1D PES Example.
14
F.1.2
2D PES Example
We perform the ablation study to two-dimensional potential energy surfaces of Müller-Brown potential
and Double-path potential to evaluate the distinct contributions of the Score-Based Interpolation (SBI)
and Score-Aligned Ascent (SAA) components. On both systems, as shown in Figure 6 and 7, using
Isodensity interpolation draws a line between two states, while Simple Averaging (SA) alone being
less effective, producing a more scattered distribution of samples, with several located in nonphysical
high-energy regions. Neither interpolation method on its own is sufficient for precise TS localization.
The introduction of the Score-Aligned Ascent proves crucial, which refines the samples, collapsing
the broad distributions onto the precise locations of the low- and high-energy transition states.
(a) Isodensity Interpolation.
(b) Simple Averaging.
(c) Isodensity Interpolation + Score-Aligned Ascent.
(d) Simple Averaging + Score-Aligned Ascent.
Figure 6: Impact of Score-Based Interpolation and Score-Aligned Ascent on Müller-Brown potential.
15
(a) Isodensity Interpolation.
(b) Simple Averaging.
(c) Isodensity Interpolation + Score-Aligned Ascent.
(d) Simple Averaging + Score-Aligned Ascent.
Figure 7: Impact of Score-Based Interpolation and Score-Aligned Ascent on Double-path potential.
16
F.1.3
Chemical Systems
We further extend our ablation study to chemical systems, alanine dipeptide and chignolin, to assess
the performance of our method in high-dimensional cases.
For alanine dipeptide, as shown in Figure 8, the results highlight the critical role of score-aligned
ascent. Isodensity Interpolation and Simple Averaging, when used alone, incorrectly identify a
region of very high potential energy as the transition state. Upon introducing score-aligned ascent,
both methods are improved, which drives generated samples are successfully guided away from
high-energy regions and converge precisely onto the known, physically meaningful transition states
based on the PES.
A similar trend is observed for the folding of chignolin, depicted in Figure 9. While both interpolation
methods can generate a coarse path between the folded and unfolded states, the resulting samples
are diffuse and do not clearly define the transition pathway. The addition of score-aligned ascent is
essential for refining this pathway, driving the scattered points near-TS region. This demonstrates
that the combination of isodensity interpolation and score-aligned ascent is robust and effective for
identifying transition states in complex biomolecular systems.
(a) Isodensity Interpolation.
(b) Simple Averaging.
(c) Isodensity Interpolation + Score-Aligned Ascent.
(d) Simple Averaging + Score-Aligned Ascent.
Figure 8: Impact of Score-Based Interpolation and Score-Aligned Ascent on alanine dipeptide.
17
(a) Isodensity Interpolation.
(b) Simple Averaging.
(c) Isodensity Interpolation + Score-Aligned Ascent.
(d) Simple Averaging + Score-Aligned Ascent.
Figure 9: Impact of Score-Based Interpolation and Score-Aligned Ascent on Chignolin.
18
F.2
Committor Analysis of Chemical Systems
F.2.1
Alanine Dipeptide
In Figure 10, we report histograms of the distributions of committor values calculated based on the
samples in Figure 8. We observe that given the partial coverage of the metastable states by our MD
simulations at 300K, simply using Score-Based Interpolation allows to sample an intermediate region
but not the TSs themselves. The SAA algorithm successfully directs the samples towards the true
TSs as demonstrated by a peaked distribution of the committor values around 0.5. SuperDiff AND
surpasses SA in our experiments.
(a) Isodensity Interpolation.
(b) Simple Averaging.
(c) Isodensity Interpolation + Score-Aligned Ascent.
(d) Simple Averaging + Score-Aligned Ascent.
Figure 10: Histogram of calculated committors on alanine dipeptide.
19
F.2.2
Chignolin
We report ML committor values computed with the trained models from [Kang et al., 2024] to
compare the effects of SBI and SAA algorithm. We observe that SAA consistently increases the
number of samples close to the q = 0.5 region. We note that the ML committor model draws much
sharper isocommittor surfaces compared to our MD evaluation for alanine dipeptide. We refer to F.3
for all TS sampling capabilities of our method applied to this system.
(a) Isodensity Interpolation.
(b) Simple Averaging.
(c) Isodensity Interpolation + Score-Aligned Ascent.
(d) Simple Averaging + Score-Aligned Ascent.
Figure 11: Histogram of ML predicted committors on Chignolin.
20
F.2.3
Comparison with Other Methods
We evaluate two baseline methods for generating conformational pathways: linear interpolation,
performed after applying the Kabsch algorithm [Lawrence et al., 2019], and a geodesic interpolation
approach based on the radius of gyration, as proposed by Zhu et al. [2019], in Figure 12 and 13
Specifically for the alanine dipeptide, both methods fail to produce physically realistic pathways,
as they traverse significant energy barriers on the Potential Energy Surface (PES). Linear interpo-
lation, in particular, is prone to generating intermediate conformations with severe steric clashes,
leading to geometrically invalid structures. While the geodesic method avoids such direct structural
inconsistencies, the pathway it defines remains energetically prohibitive and is therefore an unviable
representation of the transition.
(a) Linear interpolation.
(b) Geodesic interpolation.
(c) Structure of linear interpolation.
(d) Structure of geodesic interpolation.
Figure 12: Comparison of linear and geodesic interpolation for alanine dipeptide. The top row
visualizes the interpolated pathways on the potential energy surface (PES), while the bottom row
shows representative intermediate structures.
21
(a) Linear interpolation.
(b) Geodesic interpolation.
(c) Structure of linear interpolation.
(d) Structure of geodesic interpolation.
Figure 13: Comparison of linear and geodesic interpolation for the folding of chignolin. The top row
displays the pathways on the PES, and the bottom row shows intermediate molecular structures.
22
F.3
Qualitative Analysis of Chignolin Transition Mechanism
(a) ASTRA generated samples.
(b) References.
Figure 14: Visualization of chignolin transition state mechanisms. Representative structures from
ASTRA-sampled TSdown and TSup (left) ensembles are overlaid with transparent tubes on the reference
conformations from Kang et al. [2024] (right). The structural agreement validates our method’s
ability to resolve distinct folding pathways at atomic resolution.
To further validate the mechanistic accuracy of our approach, we conduct detailed structural analysis
of the identified transition state sub-ensembles. As shown in Figure 14, representative structures from
our ASTRA-generated TSdown and TSup ensembles exhibit remarkable concordance with reference
configurations from Kang et al. [2024]. This structural validation confirms that our method not
only localizes the correct transition region but also faithfully reproduces the atomic-level details that
distinguish competing folding mechanisms, establishing ASTRA as a powerful tool for mechanistic
discovery in complex biomolecular systems.
23