Task Alignment Outweighs Framework Choice in
Scientific LLM Agents
Nawaf Alampara 1,∗
Martiño Ríos-García 1,∗
Chandan Gupta 2,∗
Sajid Mannan 2
Santiago Miret 3
N. M. Anoop Krishnan 2,4,5
Kevin Maik Jablonka1,6,7
1FSU Jena∗
2 IIT Delhi †
3 Intel Labs
4 IIT Delhi ‡
5 IIT Delhi §
6CEEC Jena¶
7 HIPOLE Jena ∥
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
krishnan@iitd.ac.in mail@kjablonka.com
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) equipped with external tools through agentic frame-
works promise to overcome domain-specific limitations by providing specialized
capabilities for scientific applications. However, the extent to which these systems
genuinely enhance performance in complex scientific domains remains poorly
understood. Here we present Corral, a modular benchmarking framework that sys-
tematically evaluates LLM-based agents across four expert-designed environments
spanning molecular dynamics, machine learning, catalysis, and spectroscopy in
chemistry and materials science. Through comprehensive evaluation of state-of-the-
art models using different agent scaffolds, we demonstrate that the choice of agentic
framework—whether ReAct or tool-calling—plays a surprisingly minor role in
determining success. Instead, performance depends critically on the semantic align-
ment between available tools and task requirements, measured through embedding
similarity. When this alignment is poor, even sophisticated reasoning frameworks
cannot compensate for inadequate tool provisioning and a lack of domain knowl-
edge. Conversely, when base models possess sufficient domain knowledge, agentic
frameworks can introduce unnecessary overhead without meaningful benefits. Our
findings challenge the assumption that agentic systems provide a universal solution
to model limitations, revealing instead that, currently, successful scientific agents
∗Laboratory of Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry (IOMC), Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Hum-
boldstr. 10, 07743 Jena, Germany
†School of Interdisciplinary Research, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016,
India
‡Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016,
India
§Yardi School of Artificial Intelligence, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110016,
India
¶Center for Energy and Environmental Chemistry Jena, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Philosophenweg
7, 07743 Jena, Germany
∥Helmholtz Institute for Polymers in Energy Applications Jena (HIPOLE Jena), Lessingstraße 12-14, 07743,
Jena, Germany
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).
might require the same level of domain expertise in tool design that was promised
to be circumvented.
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) excel at generating text but struggle when tasks require interacting
with external systems, accessing real-time information, or executing multi-step procedures [1, 2].
Agent frameworks have been proposed to address these limitations by enabling models to plan
sequences of actions, use specialized tools, and operate within specific environments [3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10]. This approach might be particularly critical in scientific applications, where precise
domain knowledge is essential for accurate decision-making [11, 12], in which base models show
limitations [13, 14]. However, the extent to which these tools genuinely enhance model performance
remains unclear. While initiatives like the Model Context Protocol (MCP) [15] have improved
tool accessibility, the mere provision of additional tools can be counterproductive; tools may act as
distractors rather than valuable assets, leading to inefficient or erroneous outputs [16, 17].
Current evaluation methodologies predominantly focus on high-level metrics such as overall per-
formance, tool usage count, and execution time, with an emphasis on coding and machine learning
tasks [18]. Although essential for assessing production-ready systems, these metrics often overlook
some of the critical components of the systems and do not provide practical guidance on how to
improve them [19]. By focusing solely on the end result, without considering the process of tool uti-
lization, these evaluations limit our understanding of the models’ true capabilities and can even result
in agents failing to fully comprehend the functions available to them [20]. This lack of granularity is
particularly problematic in scientific fields like chemistry or biology, where agents utilize tools not
only for retrieval, but also for experiment execution, and knowledge synthesis [21].
Moreover, the importance of task-tool alignment is not properly understood. It is often unclear
whether the provided tools are truly relevant or if the agent understands when and how to use them.
Here, we demonstrate that the alignment between tasks and tools is indicative of agentic performance.
To do so, we built a novel modular benchmarking framework, systematically implemented multiple
scientific environments and agents, and conducted ablation studies.
Framework
host environments
in corral server
execute agents
 in the environment
Analysis
tool context
score
+tool
description
+error
recovery
+post & prior
tooluse context
score
task
contest
tool
alignment
create adsorbate 
slab configuration
train machine learning
 models on 
material datasets
elucidate structure
from spectra
simulate material using
 molecular dynamics
 simulation
Environments
Provide RESTful API endpoints
Figure 1: Representation of the core contribution in this work. We present the Corral framework,
which hosts environments on a server separating them from the agents, enabling an evaluation of how
the different components affect the results. This analysis of the different components allows us to
make actionable recommendations on how to improve LLM-based agents.
As illustrated in Figure 1, our main contributions are:
2
• We present Corral, a modular framework to implement, run, and test LLM-based agents.
Within Corral, four expert-designed environments are used to assess the performance of
current models.
• We benchmark two SOTA LLMs and two of the most widely implemented agent scaffolds,
providing a comprehensive evaluation of current agent capabilities.
• We perform an analysis of the factors that determine the success of an LLM-based agent. In
particular, we propose the use of embedding similarity between tools and tasks to estimate
agents’ performance. The alignment between tools and tasks is especially important when
the agent lacks the foundational knowledge required to carry out the task.
2
Related Work
LLM-based Agents
LLM-based agents demonstrated proficiency in coding tasks [22]. This has
extended to specialized domains including ML development [23], algorithm optimization [24], and
AI research automation [25]. CodeAct Agent is a multi-agent system that enables agents to either
converse with humans in natural language for clarification and confirmation or perform tasks by
executing code, such as running bash commands, Python scripts, or browser-specific programming
languages [26]. Similarly, AIDE is an ML-focused agent that autonomously drafts, debugs, and
optimizes code through iterative tree-search strategies based on user-defined goals and metrics [7].
In science, agents have targeted distinct phases of the research pipeline, including data retrieval [27,
28], simulation execution [29, 30, 31, 32], and data analysis [33]. Some notable examples are those
that can run certain lab experiments [34, 35, 36].
Scientific Agent Benchmarks
The advancements in agents are facilitated by high-quality bench-
marking frameworks that rigorously quantify agent capabilities in coding [37, 38, 39, 40], chem-
istry [41], and materials science [42, 43]. Tian et al. [44] demonstrated limitations of agents replicating
real-world scientific scripts. Even top-performing models achieved below 10 % accuracy in generat-
ing specialized scientific code. This performance gap extends to other scientific contexts, as shown
by Cui et al. [45]’s multi-domain benchmark featuring complex tasks like DFT calculations and
materials property extraction. Complementary approaches like Aviary [46] or AutoGen [47] address
system design by isolating environments from agents. These “agent gym” frameworks enable tool
decoupling and targeted optimization, yielding performance gains.
Existing benchmarks target specific scientific tasks given diverse evaluation needs [48, 19]. There
have also been attempts to measure whether the provided tools are truly relevant or if the agent
understands when and how to use them. One proposed way to assess this is by checking if expected
tools are used at each step [49], but this approach is inadequate for environments requiring open-ended
planning and strategic reasoning [48, 39]. In such cases, the agent’s ability to decompose a task and
strategically select tools becomes paramount, and currently, there is no way to measure this ability.
Overall, there is no systematic understanding that can be used as practical guidance for improving
scientific agents. By systematically ablating the components within the agentic framework for a set of
scientific environments, our work identifies critical performance limitations and provides actionable
pathways for agent improvement.
3
Corral
: Agent Evaluation Framework
The Corral framework, represented in Figure 2, is designed to define, execute, and evaluate agent
capabilities within different isolated environments (code snippets demonstrating how to implement
the different components in the framework are shown in Appendix D). Inspired by Aviary [46]
and prior works [50, 51, 52], we adopt a model similar to a Language Decision Process (LDP),
which is a specific formulation of a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) where
observations and actions are represented in text.
3
3.1
The Environment
The Environment (E) is responsible for serving the task guide to the agent (which includes the task
description and input data from previous tasks, if any), providing the necessary tools, and evaluating
the agent’s performance. Formally, the environment implements the core components of the LDP.
State Space (S).
The state s in S represents a complete snapshot of the environment at a given
time step. In Corral, this is captured by the TaskState object. A state st at time t is a tuple:
st = (P, Mt, Ct, d, σ) ∈S
(1)
where:
• P is the static task prompt or problem description.
• Mt = {m1, m2, ..., mt} is the set of messages exchanged between the agent and the
environment.
• Ct = {c1, c2, ..., ck} is the history of k tool calls made up to time t. Each ci is a ToolCall
object containing the tool name, arguments, result, and status.
• d is a boolean flag indicating if the task is completed (is_completed).
• σ is the final score, which is defined only when d is true.
During benchmarking, d and σ are not observable to the agent. However, this could be used to
optimize the system interacting with the environment during training.
Tools.
A key responsibility of the environment is provisioning a set of tools Tenv. Each tool
τ ∈Tenv is a function that maps a set of arguments to a result returned as a string.
Task (K).
A task K defines a specific, self-contained problem. It is formally a tuple:
K = (P, Treq, fscore, I0)
(2)
where:
• P is the task prompt given to the agent.
• Treq ⊆Tenv is the specific subset of tools required for this task.
• fscore is the custom scoring function used to implement the reward function R.
• I0 is the initial input data for the task.
Task Group (G).
A task group allows for the creation of complex workflows by defining dependen-
cies between tasks. Formally, a task group is a directed graph:
G = (V, E)
(3)
where V = {Ki}N
i=1 is a set of N tasks serving as the vertices of the graph. The set E ⊆V × V
contains the directed edges, where an edge (Ki, Kj) ∈E implies that the output of task Ki is a
required input for task Kj. The directed nature of the graph guarantees a well-defined execution
order.
3.2
The Agent
The Agent is the decision-making entity that interacts with the environment to solve a task. It is
implemented as a policy π that maps the history of observations to a probability distribution over the
available actions.
Action Space (A).
The action space A consists of all possible actions the agent can take. This
space is the union of all possible tool calls and a special submission action, submit.
A =
 
[
τi∈Tenv
call(τi, argsi)
!
∪submit(answer)
(4)
where argsi represents a set of arguments for tool τi. An action at ∈A is thus either a tool invocation
or the submission of a final answer.
4
Policy (π).
The policy π selects an action at at time t based on the history of observations ht =
(o1, o2, . . . , ot).
at ∼π(·|ht)
(5)
The · stands for any possible action a from the entire action space A. The Corral framework is
agnostic to the internal reasoning of the agent, allowing for different implementations of π, such as
ReAct [53], planning algorithms [54], or simple tool-calling models.
3.3
Interaction Dynamics
The Corral runner orchestrates the agent-environment interaction over a series of tasks (Figure 2
illustrates the Corral framework). Each task is part of a separate and isolated environment on the
Corral server. Within its corresponding isolated environment, the agent’s interaction unfolds over
a sequence of discrete time steps, concluding only when it executes the submit action. Upon this
terminal action, the Corral runner finalizes the interaction with the current environment and proceeds
to the next task.
Transition Function (T).
The state transition function T : S × A →S describes how the state
evolves.
st+1 = T(st, at)
(6)
If at = call(τ, args), the environment executes the tool and updates the state by appending a new
ToolCall record to the history Ct, resulting in Ct+1. If at = submit(answer), the environment
updates the state by setting d to true and computing a score.
Observation Space (O) and Function (Z).
After the environment transitions to a new state st+1,
the agent receives an observation ot+1 ∈O. The observation function Z : S →O could be stochastic
depending up on the tool.
ot+1 = Z(st+1)
(7)
The observation is typically the string-based result or error message from the most recent tool call,
which corresponds to the result or error_message field in the last element of the tool call history
Ct+1.
Reward Function (R).
The reward function R : S × A →R provides the feedback signal to the
agent. In Corral, during benchmarking, rewards are sparse and terminal. A reward is only issued
when the agent takes the submit action.
R(st, at) =
fscore(answer)
if at = submit(answer)
0
otherwise
(8)
The reward is the agent’s score in that particular task. In our experiments, we stick to binary rewards
(either 0 or 1).
4
Results
The environments for our evaluations, detailed in Appendix E, are deliberately designed to represent
a spectrum of complexity and require specialized knowledge. The ML and OpenCatalyst tasks
are more aligned with standard computational workflows, while molecular dynamics (MD) requires
nuanced scientific knowledge, and especially Spectra requires reasoning over and validating the
hypotheses it generates based on chemical observations.
To disentangle the effect of the framework in the policy, we compare two agent strategies, ReAct [53]
and tool-calling. ReAct promotes an iterative thought-action-observation loop. The tool-calling
agent is a more direct, function-execution approach, which might be more efficient for well-defined
workflows. We probe the capability of the core reasoning engine of the policy (π) by testing two
different foundation models.
5
Corral server
Task group
Corral runner
Agents
• run agents
• report
ReAct
Tool
calling
Planner
tools
code
execution
...
data
retriever
•
task prompt
•
score()
Task 1
...
...
tools
•
task prompt
•
score()
Task 2
...
web
search
lab
verification
...
RESTful API calls
can easily add more
Figure 2: Illustration of the Corral framework. The architecture is composed of the Corral
server (implementing the environment dynamics), agents ( the policies π), and the Corral runner
(orchestrating the agent-environment interaction over a series of tasks).
4.1
Overall Performance
Figure 3 shows the agents’ ability to successfully complete the task within five attempts (pass@5,
metrics used in the work are detailed in Appendix A). The illustration provides a high-level view of
their capabilities across the four scientific environments, which are ranked by the domain expertise
required to solve the tasks. The Spectra environment requires most domain-specific skills, the ML
environment the least. The results underscore the significant impact of domain complexity on the
policy’s ( π) ability to achieve a high reward, R. Interestingly, these results follow an inverse trend
compared to the number of tool calls, as reported in Appendix G, suggesting that agents tend to
sample more tools when unsure of how to solve the tasks.
Performance and Domain Familiarity Comparison
In the OpenCatalyst and ML environments,
both Claude-3.5 Sonnet and GPT-4o achieve near-perfect scores. This suggests that for these
tasks, the policies (π) can effectively map the initial task prompt P to the correct sequence of tool
calls. Conversely, environments demanding deep, specialized knowledge as MD and Spectra, result
in lower scores. The particularly low scores in the Spectra environment highlight the difficulty the
policy faces in interpreting chemical data to select the optimal sequence of actions from A.
Agent and Model Comparison
In the more demanding MD and Spectra environments, the
differences between agents are very small. This is surprising since the tool-calling agent is a much
simpler implementation that does not enforce agents’ reasoning compared with ReAct. However, in
other environments where we suspect that the policies are trained on the reasoning chain in ReAct,
it turns out to be helpful. Claude-3.5 Sonnet consistently shows a slight performance advantage
over GPT-4o, especially in these challenging domains. This might suggest that Claude-3.5 Sonnet
is more familiar with chemistry and material science compared to GPT-4o, consistent with prior
research [14, 13].
4.2
Decomposing Tasks
To validate our hypothesis that the policy, π, is less likely to converge on a successful action trajectory
for unfamiliar tasks, we evaluate the tasks in two different formats. As single tasks ( K), and chained
tasks, where the single tasks are broken down to smaller single-step problems, forming a task group
G. In a chained configuration, dependencies are defined and the output of task Ki serves as the initial
input, I0, for task Kj (see example in Appendix E.4.3). By breaking down the tasks into smaller
tasks, the action space (or the action trajectory) over which the policies have to reason is constrained.
6
Figure 3: Impact of domain expertise on agent performance across environments. This plot
shows the pass@5 scores for each agent across the four environments, ordered by the level of required
domain expertise (from low at the bottom to high at the top). There is a clear inverse correlation: as
the need for specialized knowledge increases, the agents’ ability to successfully complete the task
within five attempts decreases. This visualizes the significant challenge that deep domain expertise
poses to the agents’ policies.
Improved Performance through Decomposition in Complex Domains
As shown in Figure 4, for
the MD and Spectra environments, all agent and model configurations show a significant improvement
in performance when moving from a single task to a chained one. For example, in the Spectra
environment, the Claude-3.5 Sonnet tool-calling agent’s score jumps from below 0.25 on the
single task to nearly 0.50 on the chained task. This strongly suggests that decomposing a complex
problem into a structured sequence of smaller tasks provides a crucial scaffold that helps agents
succeed if many domain skills are needed.
Performance Breakdown by Task Categories
To further ground our understanding that lower
performance could be attributed to the inability of the model to reason and validate scientific
hypotheses and tasks, we classified all the decomposed tasks into a set of categories (“retrieval”,
“code execution”, “experiment execution”, “reasoning”, and “validation”). For example, fetching
a structure from Materials Project (MP)[55] in the OpenCatalyst environment is classified as
“retrieval”, while running a Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS)
simulation is classified as “experiment execution”. This classification was done manually by the
experts who designed the environments.
Figure 5 plots the average pass@5 score for each of the categories. This breakdown reveals that
the primary challenge for current agents lies in higher-order reasoning, validation of the generated
history, and execution rather than simple tool use. Again, as for the single task results, we observe
that both agents, ReAct and tool-calling, perform very similarly despite the difference in complexity.
4.3
Tool Verbosity Ablation
It is well known that the amount of context provided to an LLM is important for the performance [56,
57]. In an attempt to systematically understand the importance of this for the agent performance, we
encoded the tool descriptions in a structured format (described in Appendix C) and ablated the effect
of only showing parts of this to the model. We evaluated agent performance across three progressively
detailed verbosity levels: BRIEF, WORKFLOW, and COMPREHENSIVE. This tiered approach allows us
to measure how performance scales as the agent is supplied with increasingly rich contextual and
operational knowledge about its tools.
7
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Pass@5
OpenCatalyst
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
MD
Single
Chained
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Pass@5
ML
Single
Chained
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Spectra
Claude 3.5 Sonnet
GPT-4o
ReAct Agent
Tool-Calling Agent
Figure 4: Performance comparison between single and chained tasks. This plot shows the pass@5
scores when the task is decomposed into simple one-step tasks, and when it is not. All tools are in
COMPREHENSIVE verbosity (refer to Appendix C for a detailed explanation about the different levels
of tool descriptions considered). In the more challenging MD and Spectra environments, all agent
configurations show a significant increase in overall score when the task is presented as a chained
sequence of sub-tasks. Table comparing results for all different tool verbosity in Table I.11
Retrieval
Code Execution
Experiment Execution
Reasoning
Validation
Task Categories
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Average pass@5
Claude 3.5 Sonnet
GPT-4o
React Agent
Tool-Calling Agent
Figure 5: Performance breakdown by task categories. This figure illustrates the average pass@5
scores of different agent configurations across five task categories. All tasks were manually classified
into different categories by the experts who designed the environments. While agents excel at concrete
tasks like “retrieval” and “code execution”, performance declines for more complex categories such
as “experiment execution”, “reasoning”, and “validation”. The average score here is the mean of
pass@5 scores for each of the chained tasks.
Level of Description Is Not All You Need
As detailed in Table I.11, for OpenCatalyst and ML
environments, performance is consistently high for the three levels of tool description that were
considered. For the most complex environments, Spectra and MD, the scores, despite being worse
than for the other environments, do not show a clear trend in which verbosity is better. For example,
in the Spectra environment, it is possible to see that the best score overall is achieved in the BRIEF
description scenario by the tool-calling agent in the chained fashion. However, that same agent
has a very similar performance when the tool descriptions follow the WORKFLOW level. Similarly,
when evaluating the full or single task, the best score is obtained with the COMPREHENSIVE level of
description.
4.4
Dependence on Task and Tool Similarity
In our analysis, we observe that the Spectra environment performs much worse than the rest of
the environments, independent of the level of detail in the tool description. We hypothesize that
this is because the tools provided in this environment are less aligned with the most difficult step
in the tasks compared to other environments. To probe this hypothesis, we embedded the tools
and task descriptions and measured their distances. A detailed description of how the embeddings
are obtained and the distances calculated is provided in Appendix J. Table 1 shows that Spectra
shows the largest mean minimum distances between tasks and tools, followed by the MD, ML, and
8
OpenCatalyst environments. This ordering correlates with the overall performance of the agents
in these environments. Additionally, Spectra presents the second-highest mean distance between
tasks, only after ML. We hypothesize that the larger distances between consecutive tasks in ML explain
the scores observed for Pass∧k, detailed in Appendix F.
Table 1: Embedding distance analysis. Mean cosine distances between consecutive tasks in a chain,
between all tasks and tools, and between the minimum or closest tool to each task. The results show
that Spectra is among the highest values for the measured distances, which could explain the bad
results in this environment.
Task
Tools
Mean of
consecutive
tasks
Verbosity
Distance Tools-Tasks
Mean
Mean of
Minimum
Spectra
15
0.52
brief
0.70
0.52
workflow
0.75
0.59
comprehensive
0.84
0.73
MD
4
0.26
brief
0.64
0.58
workflow
0.65
0.60
comprehensive
0.72
0.66
OpenCatalyst
6
0.38
brief
0.61
0.38
workflow
0.60
0.42
comprehensive
0.71
0.57
ML
12
0.65
brief
0.68
0.39
workflow
0.65
0.40
comprehensive
0.72
0.52
This correlation can be used to strategically improve agentic systems. To test this, we augmented the
Spectra environment with a new tool that works as a hypothesis generator by proposing molecular
fragments for the candidate molecule. While this value might seem insignificant, as Figure 6 shows,
we find that with this tool Claude-3.5 Sonnet now performs comparably in both single and chained
settings. GPT-4o, which is less proficient in spectroscopic tasks in other benchmarks [13], fails to
leverage this additional tool.
Single
Chained
Ablation
(single)
0.0
0.5
1.0
pass@5
Claude 3.5 Sonnet
GPT-4o
React Agent
Tool-Calling Agent
Single
Chained
Figure 6: Results comparing single, chained, and the ablation for the Spectra environment.
The figure shows that by incorporating a new tool, the distance between tools and tasks is closed,
resulting in a massive improvement in the scores of the single task being comparable to the ones in
the chained task.
5
Conclusion
Large language models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across diverse tasks, yet significant
performance gaps persist in specialized domains like chemistry and materials science. The field
has responded with increasing enthusiasm for agentic systems—frameworks that equip LLMs with
external tools and reasoning scaffolds. This approach emerged from a compelling belief: that
agents could serve as a universal bridge, compensating for any base model’s limitations simply by
providing domain-specific tools. The promise was elegant in its simplicity—rather than training
9
specialized models for each domain, we could build flexible agents that adapt to any task through
careful framework engineering and tool provisioning.
Our systematic evaluation using our Corral framework reveals this foundational assumption to be
deeply flawed. Through comprehensive benchmarking across four expert-designed environments
spanning molecular dynamics, machine learning, catalysis, and spectroscopy, we demonstrate that
the choice of agentic framework—whether ReAct, or tool-calling—plays a surprisingly minor role in
determining success. Instead, performance depends critically on the alignment between available
tools and task requirements, coupled with the base model’s existing domain knowledge. When models
already possess adequate domain expertise, agentic frameworks introduce unnecessary overhead
without meaningful benefits. Conversely, when domain knowledge is absent, only meticulously
crafted tools that precisely match task demands can bridge the gap—a requirement that eliminates the
promised flexibility and demands exactly the kind of deep domain expertise that agents were meant
to circumvent.
These findings fundamentally challenge the notion that agentic systems provide a universal solution
to model limitations. Rather than offering a flexible path around the need for specialized knowledge,
agents reveal themselves to be highly dependent on the very expertise they promised to democratize.
Our work highlights an enduring truth: the absence of domain-specific knowledge in foundation
models cannot be overcome through framework sophistication alone, but only through targeted tool
design that requires the same level of domain expertise as training specialized models—suggesting
that domain-specific models are far less obsolete than one might think.
6
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Carl Zeiss Foundation, OpenPhilanthropy, and a “Talent Fund” of
the “Life” profile line of the Friedrich Schiller University Jena.
Part of the work of M.R.G. was supported by Intel and Merck via the AWASES Center.
K.M.J. is part of the NFDI consortium FAIRmat funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG, German Research Foundation) – project 460197019.
K.M.J. and N.M.A.K. acknowledge the Google Research Scholar Award.
N.M.A.K. acknowledges the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation for funding support, and the HPC
IIT Delhi for computational and storage resources.
We thank Carmelo Gonzales, Kelvin Lee, and Rafael Rosales for discussions. Moreover, we thank
Gordan Prastalo and Mara Schilling-Wilhelmi for feedback on an early version of the manuscript.
10
References
[1]
Andrew D. White. “The future of chemistry is language”. In: Nature Reviews Chemistry 7.7
(May 2023), pp. 457–458. ISSN: 2397-3358. DOI: 10.1038/s41570-023-00502-0. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41570-023-00502-0.
[2]
Nawaf Alampara et al. “General purpose models for the chemical sciences”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv: 2507.07456 (2025).
[3]
David Silver and Richard S Sutton. “Welcome to the era of experience”. In: Google AI 1
(2025).
[4]
John Yang et al. “SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engi-
neering”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2405.15793 (2024).
[5]
Bang Liu et al. “Advances and Challenges in Foundation Agents: From Brain-Inspired Intelli-
gence to Evolutionary, Collaborative, and Safe Systems”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2504.01990
(2025).
[6]
Samuel Schmidgall et al. “Agent Laboratory: Using LLM Agents as Research Assistants”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2501.04227 (2025).
[7]
Zhengyao Jiang et al. “AIDE: AI-Driven Exploration in the Space of Code”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv: 2502.13138 (2025).
[8]
Xingyao Wang et al. “OpenHands: An Open Platform for AI Software Developers as Generalist
Agents”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2407.16741 (2024).
[9]
Theodore R. Sumers et al. “Cognitive Architectures for Language Agents”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv: 2309.02427 (2023).
[10]
Noah Shinn et al. “Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2303.11366 (2023).
[11]
Alán Aspuru-Guzik and Varinia Bernales. “The rise of agents: Computational chemistry
is ready for (R)evolution”. In: Polyhedron (July 2025), p. 117707. ISSN: 0277-5387. DOI:
10.1016/j.poly.2025.117707. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.poly.2025.
117707.
[12]
Santiago Miret and NM Anoop Krishnan. “Enabling large language models for real-world
materials discovery”. In: Nature Machine Intelligence (2025), pp. 1–8.
[13]
Adrian Mirza et al. “A framework for evaluating the chemical knowledge and reasoning
abilities of large language models against the expertise of chemists”. In: Nature Chemistry
(2025), pp. 1–8.
[14]
Nawaf Alampara et al. “Probing the limitations of multimodal language models for chemistry
and materials research”. In: Nature Computational Science (2025), pp. 1–10.
[15]
Anthropic. Model Context Protocol. Protocol Specification. Open protocol for connecting AI
applications to external data sources and tools. Anthropic, PBC, Nov. 2024. URL: https:
//modelcontextprotocol.io.
[16]
Varatheepan Paramanayakam et al. “Less is More: Optimizing Function Calling for LLM
Execution on Edge Devices”. In: Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference, DATE 2025,
Lyon, France, March 31 - April 2, 2025. IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–7. DOI: 10.23919/DATE64628.
2025.10992798. URL: https://doi.org/10.23919/DATE64628.2025.10992798.
[17]
Guozhao Mo et al. “LiveMCPBench: Can Agents Navigate an Ocean of MCP Tools?” In:
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2508.01780 (2025).
[18]
Mahmoud Mohammadi et al. “Evaluation and Benchmarking of LLM Agents: A Survey”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2507.21504 (2025).
[19]
Nawaf Alampara, Mara Schilling-Wilhelmi, and Kevin Maik Jablonka. “Lessons from the
trenches on evaluating machine-learning systems in materials science”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv: 2503.10837 (2025).
[20]
Xuanqi Gao et al. “MCP-RADAR: A Multi-Dimensional Benchmark for Evaluating Tool Use
Capabilities in Large Language Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2505.16700 (2025).
[21]
Mayk Caldas Ramos, Christopher J. Collison, and Andrew D. White. “A review of large
language models and autonomous agents in chemistry”. In: Chemical Science 16.6 (2025),
pp. 2514–2572. ISSN: 2041-6539. DOI: 10.1039/d4sc03921a. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1039/D4SC03921A.
11
[22]
Carlos E. Jimenez et al. “SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-World GitHub
Issues?” In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2310.06770 (2023).
[23]
Jun Shern Chan et al. “MLE-bench: Evaluating Machine Learning Agents on Machine Learning
Engineering”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2025).
[24]
Alexander Novikov et al. “AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discov-
ery”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2506.13131 (2025).
[25]
Juraj Gottweis et al. “Towards an AI co-scientist”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2502.18864
(2025).
[26]
Xingyao Wang et al. “Executable Code Actions Elicit Better LLM Agents”. In: Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning. 2024. URL: https://openreview.net/
forum?id=jJ9BoXAfFa.
[27]
Michael D. Skarlinski et al. “Language agents achieve superhuman synthesis of scientific
knowledge”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2409.13740 (2024).
[28]
Yuan Chiang et al. “LLaMP: Large Language Model Made Powerful for High-fidelity Materials
Knowledge Retrieval and Distillation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2401.17244 (2024).
[29]
Shuxiang Cao et al. “Agents for self-driving laboratories applied to quantum computing”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2412.07978 (2024).
[30]
Quintina Campbell et al. “MDCrow: Automating Molecular Dynamics Workflows with Large
Language Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2502.09565 (2025).
[31]
Yunheng Zou et al. “El Agente: An Autonomous Agent for Quantum Chemistry”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2505.02484 (2025).
[32]
Mhd Hussein Murtada, Z. Faidon Brotzakis, and Michele Vendruscolo. “MD-LLM-1: A Large
Language Model for Molecular Dynamics”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2508.03709 (2025).
[33]
Indrajeet Mandal et al. “Autonomous Microscopy Experiments through Large Language Model
Agents”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2501.10385 (2024).
[34]
Andres M. Bran et al. “Augmenting large language models with chemistry tools”. In: Nature
Machine Intelligence 6.5 (May 2024), pp. 525–535. ISSN: 2522-5839. DOI: 10.1038/s42256-
024-00832-8. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s42256-024-00832-8.
[35]
Kourosh Darvish et al. “ORGANA: A robotic assistant for automated chemistry experimen-
tation and characterization”. In: Matter 8.2 (Feb. 2025), p. 101897. ISSN: 2590-2385. DOI:
10.1016/j.matt.2024.10.015. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.matt.2024.
10.015.
[36]
Daniil A. Boiko et al. “Autonomous chemical research with large language models”. In: Nature
624.7992 (Dec. 2023), pp. 570–578. ISSN: 1476-4687. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-06792-
0. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06792-0.
[37]
Hjalmar Wijk et al. “RE-Bench: Evaluating frontier AI R&D capabilities of language model
agents against human experts”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2411.15114 (2024).
[38]
Megan Kinniment et al. “Evaluating Language-Model Agents on Realistic Autonomous Tasks”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2312.11671 (2023).
[39]
Zachary S. Siegel et al. “CORE-Bench: Fostering the Credibility of Published Research
Through a Computational Reproducibility Agent Benchmark”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:
2409.11363 (2024).
[40]
Grégoire Mialon et al. “GAIA: a benchmark for General AI Assistants”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv: 2311.12983 (2023).
[41]
Ludovico Mitchener et al. “BixBench: a Comprehensive Benchmark for LLM-based Agents in
Computational Biology”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2503.00096 (2025).
[42]
Ziru Chen et al. “ScienceAgentBench: Toward Rigorous Assessment of Language Agents for
Data-Driven Scientific Discovery”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2410.05080 (2024).
[43]
Jingyi Chai et al. “SciMaster: Towards General-Purpose Scientific AI Agents, Part I. X-Master
as Foundation: Can We Lead on Humanity’s Last Exam?” In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2507.05241
(2025).
[44]
Minyang Tian et al. “SciCode: A Research Coding Benchmark Curated by Scientists”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2407.13168 (2024).
[45]
Hao Cui et al. “CURIE: Evaluating LLMs On Multitask Scientific Long Context Understanding
and Reasoning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2503.13517 (2025).
12
[46]
Siddharth Narayanan et al. “Aviary: training language agents on challenging scientific tasks”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2412.21154 (2024).
[47]
Microsoft. AutoGen: A Programming Framework for Agentic AI. https : / / github .
com/microsoft/autogen. Accessed: 2025-08-20. 2025. URL: https://github.com/
microsoft/autogen.
[48]
Sayash Kapoor et al. “AI Agents That Matter”. In: Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. 2025 (2025).
URL: https://openreview.net/forum?id=Zy4uFzMviZ.
[49]
Yue Huang et al. “MetaTool Benchmark for Large Language Models: Deciding Whether to
Use Tools and Which to Use”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2310.03128 (2023).
[50]
Thomas Carta et al. “Grounding Large Language Models in Interactive Environments with
Online Reinforcement Learning”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2302.02662 (2023).
[51]
Muning Wen et al. “Reinforcing language agents via policy optimization with action decompo-
sition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15821 (2024).
[52]
Yifan Song et al. “Trial and error: Exploration-based trajectory optimization for llm agents”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02502 (2024).
[53]
Shunyu Yao et al. “ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models”. In:
International Conference on Learning Representations (2022).
[54]
Chan Hee Song et al. “LLM-Planner: Few-Shot Grounded Planning for Embodied Agents
with Large Language Models”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2212.04088 (2022).
[55]
Matthew K Horton et al. “Accelerated data-driven materials science with the Materials Project”.
In: Nature Materials (2025), pp. 1–11.
[56]
Yushi Bai et al. “LongBench v2: Towards Deeper Understanding and Reasoning on Realistic
Long-context Multitasks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2412.15204 (2024).
[57]
Cheng-Ping Hsieh et al. “RULER: What’s the Real Context Size of Your Long-Context
Language Models?” In: arXiv preprint arXiv: 2404.06654 (2024).
13
Appendix
A
Metrics
To evaluate the overall performance of the benchmark, we employ a suite of metrics that capture
different aspects of the agent’s capabilities, from correctness and efficiency to resource consumption.
A.1
Average Score
The average score provides a measure of the mean performance across all tasks. It is calculated as the
average of the mean scores for each individual task.
Let T be the set of all task IDs, and for each task t ∈T, let St be the set of scores for each trial of
that task. The average score for a single task t is given by:
µt =
1
|St|
X
s∈St
s
(A1)
The overall average score is then the mean of these individual task averages:
Average Score = 1
|T|
X
t∈T
µt
(A2)
A.2
Overall Success Rate
The overall success rate is the average of the success rates of all individual tasks. A trial is considered
successful if its score is greater than zero and no error message is generated.
Let T be the set of all tasks. The success rate for a single task t, denoted as SRt, is the proportion of
successful trials for that task. The overall success rate is then:
Overall Success Rate = 1
|T|
X
t∈T
SRt
(A3)
A.3
Pass@k
The pass@k [1] metric evaluates the probability that at least one out of k trials for a given task
succeeds. It is a valuable metric for assessing the likelihood of achieving a correct solution within a
limited number of attempts. The overall pass@k is the average of the task-specific pass@k values.
For a single task, let n be the total number of trials and c be the number of successful trials. The
probability of a single trial succeeding is p = c/n. The pass@k is then calculated as:
pass@k = 1 −(1 −p)k = 1 −

1 −c
n
k
(A4)
The overall pass@k is the average of this value across all tasks:
Overall pass@k = 1
|T|
X
t∈T
pass@kt
(A5)
A.4
Pass∧k
The pass∧k (pass-hat-k) metric [1] measures the probability that all k trials for a given task succeed.
This metric is a stricter evaluation of reliability and consistency. The overall pass∧k is the average of
the task-specific pass∧k values.
Using the same notation as for pass@k, the pass∧k for a single task is given by:
pass∧k = pk =
 c
n
k
(A6)
The overall pass∧k is the average of this value across all tasks:
Overall pass∧k = 1
|T|
X
t∈T
pass∧k
(A7)
14
A.5
Token Usage
To measure the computational cost, we record the token usage for each trial. The total token usage is
the sum of tokens consumed across all trials in the benchmark. This can be broken down into prompt
tokens, completion tokens, and total tokens.
A.6
Tool Call Statistics
We also track the usage and success of tool calls made by the agent. This includes the total number
of successful and failed tool calls across all trials and tasks. For failed tool calls, the failure is
also classified to invalid_tool (invalid tool name), invalid_args (invalid tool arguments) or
execution_error (error in executing the tool).
A.7
Duration Metrics
We measure various aspects of the benchmark’s execution time:
• Total Tool Execution Duration: The sum of the execution time for all tool calls across all
trials.
• Overall Average Trial Duration: The average duration of a single trial across all tasks.
• Total Duration: The total time taken to run all trials for all tasks in the benchmark.
B
The Benchmark Server API Routes
To facilitate interaction between the agent and the environments, we have developed a benchmark
server with a RESTful API. This server exposes a set of endpoints that allow the agent to retrieve
task information, interact with the provided tools, and submit its final answer. The API is designed
to be clear, consistent, and stateless, adhering to the principles of REST. The available endpoints
are detailed in Table B.1. Each endpoint is described with its HTTP method, URL path, a brief
description of its functionality, and any relevant path or query parameters.
Table B.1: Benchmark Server API Endpoints. The table specifies all
the endpoints that the server hosting the environments admits.
Method
Path
Description
Task and Environment Discovery
GET
/tasks
Retrieves a list of all available task IDs in the
benchmark.
GET
/dependency_chain
Indicates whether any tasks in the benchmark are
part of a dependency chain.
GET
/tasks/{task_id}/
prompt
Fetches the specific prompt for a given task. The
{task_id} is a path parameter representing the
unique identifier for the task.
GET
/tasks/{task_id}/guide
Returns the complete environment guide for a
task, including the prompt and a detailed descrip-
tion of the available tools. Accepts an optional
verbosity query parameter (e.g., MINIMAL or
WORKFLOW) to control the level of detail in the tool
descriptions.
Tool Interaction and Introspection
15
Table B.1 continued from previous page
Method
Path
Description
GET
/tasks/{task_id}/tools
Returns a structured JSON object detailing the
available tools for a task, compatible with function-
calling APIs. The level of detail in the argument de-
scriptions is controlled by the optional verbosity
query parameter.
GET
/tasks/{task_id}/
tools/guide
Provides a guide to the tools available for a specific
task. Also accepts the optional verbosity query
parameter.
POST
/tasks/{task_id}/
tools/execute
Executes a specified tool with the provided argu-
ments within the task’s environment. The tool
name and arguments are sent in the request body.
State Management and Task Submission
GET
/tasks/{task_id}/state
Retrieves the current state of the specified task
environment.
POST
/tasks/{task_id}/
submit
Submits a final answer for the task. The submit-
ted answer is in the request body. The response
includes the score and the final state of the trial.
GET
/tasks/{task_id}/
status
Gets the completion status of a task, including
whether it is completed, the final score, the submit-
ted answer, and tool usage statistics.
GET
/tasks/{task_id}/
trials
Retrieves the states of all trials that have been run
for a specific task.
GET
/tasks/{task_id}/
trials/{trial_id}
Fetches the state of a specific trial for a given task,
identified by its unique {trial_id}.
C
Structured Tool Descriptions and Verbosity Levels
To systematically ablate the information provided to the agent, we developed a structured, tag-based
format for all tool docstrings. This allows us to programmatically control the content of the tool
descriptions presented to the LLM at different verbosity levels. When a new tool is developed, its
function docstring is written once in a comprehensive, structured format. During the setup of a
benchmark run, our framework dynamically parses this complete docstring. Based on the selected
verbosity strategy (e.g., BRIEF, WORKFLOW), it then filters and formats the content to generate the
precise, tailored tool description that will be exposed to the agent.
C.1
Documentation Tags
Each part of the tool’s documentation is enclosed in a specific tag, allowing for granular filtering.
The primary tags used are:
[BRIEF] A single-sentence, high-level summary of the tool’s function.
[DETAILED] A more thorough explanation of what the tool does and how it works internally.
[PROCEDURAL] Guidance on when and why to use the tool in a problem-solving process.
[CONTEXTUAL] Information about the tool’s operational context, such as its dependencies or data
sources.
[WORKFLOW_INTEGRATION] An explicit, structured guide on how the tool fits into a multi-step plan,
outlining prerequisites, the current action, and follow-up steps.
[SYNTACTICAL] Concrete, valid usage examples of the tool’s syntax.
16
[RAISES] A list of potential exceptions or errors the tool might raise, including conditions and
recovery suggestions.
[LIMITATIONS] Known limitations or edge cases where the tool might not perform as expected.
[EXAMPLES] Illustrative examples, often for arguments or return values.
C.2
Verbosity Levels
Our ablation studies focus on three distinct verbosity levels, which are constructed by including
content from a specific subset of the tags described above.
• BRIEF: Includes only content from the [BRIEF] tags. This provides the agent with the most
minimal functional description.
• WORKFLOW:
Includes
content
from
[BRIEF],
[DETAILED],
[PROCEDURAL],
[CONTEXTUAL], and [WORKFLOW_INTEGRATION]. This level is designed to give the
agent rich strategic and operational context.
• COMPREHENSIVE: Includes all available tags. This level equips the agent with complete
knowledge for robust execution, including syntax, error handling, and limitations.
C.3
Example: The get_structure_from_mp_text Tool
The following examples demonstrate the exact text shown to the agent for the same tool at each of the
three verbosity levels. Note that the descriptive tags themselves are filtered out, and only the enclosed
content is presented.
Example: BRIEF Verbosity Description
Retrieve a pymatgen structure from Materials Project using its API and return CIF content as
text.
Args:
mp_id: Materials Project identifier string.
Returns:
str: CIF content string containing the crystal structure data.
Example: WORKFLOW Verbosity Description
Retrieve a pymatgen structure from Materials Project using its API and return CIF content as
text.
This tool connects to the Materials Project database to download crystal structure data for a
given material ID. It retrieves the structure object and converts it to CIF (Crystallographic
Information File) format, which is the standard format for storing crystal structure information.
CIF is then returned as string
When to use: Use when you need to retrieve bulk crystal structures from the Materials Project
database. Best suited for materials with known MP IDs. Usually first step in simulation
workflows. Recommended for obtaining crystal structures for preparing bulk structures,
supercells, bulk cells, slabs etc. Avoid when you need multiple structures.
How this tool works: Connects to Materials Project API using authentication key. Searches
for the specified material ID (MP ID) in the database (MP ID is given as input parameter
or if other tools are available to search for MP ID based on available information, then use
those tools). Retrieves the pymatgen Structure object containing atomic positions and lattice
parameters. Converts the structure to CIF format string for compatibility with other tools.
Returns standardized crystallographic data suitable for further processing.
17
Workflow: 1. [PREREQUISITE] Ensure that the other more specific tools are not suitable
and you dont have to retrieve multiple structures 2. [CURRENT] Apply this tool with a valid
MP ID to retrieve bulk structure 3. [FOLLOW_UP] Use the CIF output with slab generation
tools like enumerate_slabs_text to create slab structures
Args:
mp_id: Materials Project identifier string. The unique identifier used by Materials Project
to catalog materials. Should be in the format "mp-XXXXX" where XXXXX is
a numerical ID. This ID corresponds to a specific material entry in the Materials
Project database.
Returns:
str: CIF content string containing the crystal structure data. A properly formatted CIF
(Crystallographic Information File) string containing all necessary information about
the crystal structure, including lattice parameters, atomic positions, space group,
and symmetry operations. This format is widely compatible with crystallographic
software and other structure analysis tools.
Example: COMPREHENSIVE Verbosity Description
Retrieve a pymatgen structure from Materials Project using its API and return CIF content as
text.
This tool connects to the Materials Project database to download crystal structure data for a
given material ID. It retrieves the structure object and converts it to CIF (Crystallographic
Information File) format, which is the standard format for storing crystal structure information.
CIF is then returned as string.
When to use: Use when you need to retrieve bulk crystal structures from the Materials Project
database. Best suited for materials with known MP IDs. Usually first step in simulation
workflows. Recommended for obtaining crystal structures for preparing bulk structures,
supercells, bulk cells, slabs etc. Avoid when you need multiple structures.
How this tool works: Connects to Materials Project API using authentication key. Searches
for the specified material ID (MP ID) in the database...
Workflow: 1. [PREREQUISITE] Ensure that the other more specific tools are not suitable... 2.
[CURRENT] Apply this tool with a valid MP ID to retrieve bulk structure 3. [FOLLOW_UP]
Use the CIF output with slab generation tools...
Usage examples:
get_structure_from_mp_text ("mp -149")
# Silicon
structure
get_structure_from_mp_text ("mp -20066") # CO2
structure
Exceptions:
• ConnectionError: When unable to connect to Materials Project API. Recovery:
Check internet connection and MP_API_KEY.
• KeyError: When the specified MP ID is not found. Recovery: Verify MP ID syntax
and existence on the Materials Project website.
Limitations:
• Limited to materials available in the Materials Project database.
• May not include the most recent experimental structures.
Args:
18
mp_id: Materials Project identifier string. The unique identifier used by Materials Project...
Should be in the format "mp-XXXXX"... Syntax: "mp-" followed by digits (e.g.,
"mp-149", "mp-20066"). Examples: "mp-149" (Silicon), "mp-20066" (CO2).
Returns:
str: CIF content string containing the crystal structure data. A properly formatted CIF
string containing all necessary information... Example:
# generated
using
pymatgen
data_Si
_symmetry_space_group_name_H -M
’P 1’
_cell_length_a
3.83996459
...
D
Corral Framework Usage Examples
The Corral framework is built using such a modular design that is simple to implement agents,
add new environments, and run the benchmark. For example, the code block below shows how to
benchmark an agent using the Corral framework. It needs to set up the environment, create a logger
for tracking experiments, and then run a benchmark with an agent, outputting the results such as the
overall score.


from
corral.evaluate
import
BenchmarkInterface , MatAgentBenchmark
from
corral.agents.react
import
ReActAgent
from
corral.report
import
CorralWandbLogger
# Setup
environments
server
running
interface = BenchmarkInterface ("http :// localhost :8000")
# Setup the WandB
logger
wandblogger = CorralWandbLogger (
project="corral",
group=" experiment_group ",
name="run_name",
)
# Setup the agent
agent = ReActAgent(model="gpt -4o", max_iterations =10, temperature =0.1)
# Run
benchmark
runner = MatAgentBenchmark (interface , agent , logger=wandblogger)
result = runner.bench ()
print(f"Overall
score: {result.total_score :.2f}")


The next code block focuses on setting up and running a Corral environment server. In it, a custom
environment is defined by implementing the Environment class, specifying the task, problem, and
expected answer. The server is then created to host the benchmark tasks and make them accessible to
agents for evaluation.


from
corral.base
import
Environment
from
corral.server
import
create_benchmark_server
class
MyEnvironment(Environment):
19
def
__init__(self , task_id: str , problem: str , answer: str):
self.problem = problem
self. correct_answer = answer
super ().__init__(task_id)
# Add your
tools
self.add_tool(my_custom_tool )
def
get_task_prompt (self) -> str:
return f"Solve
this
problem: {self.problem}"
def score(self) -> float:
if self.state. submitted_answer is None:
return 0.0
return 1.0 if self.state. submitted_answer == self.
correct_answer
else 0.0
# Define
your
tasks
environments = {
"task_1": MyEnvironment ("task_1", "Problem 1", "Answer 1"),
"task_2": MyEnvironment ("task_2", "Problem 2", "Answer 2"),
}
# Create
server
if __name__ == "__main__":
app = create_benchmark_server ( environments)
import
uvicorn
uvicorn.run(app , host="0.0.0.0", port =8000)


Similarly, the code block below demonstrates how to create a custom agent within the Corral
framework. To that, one can define a custom agent class that extends BaseAgent and implement the
logic for the agent’s task processing. This agent interacts with the benchmark interface to retrieve
task information and use tools to solve problems.


from
corral.agents.base_agent
import
BaseAgent
from
corral.evaluate
import
BenchmarkInterface
class
MyAgent(BaseAgent):
def
__init__(self , model: str , ** kwargs):
super ().__init__(model , ** kwargs)
# Add your agent -specific
initialization
def run(self , interface: BenchmarkInterface , task_id: str) -> str:
# Get task
information
guide = interface.get_task_guide (task_id)
# Your
agent
logic
here
# Use
interface.execute_tool () to call
tools
return "Your
final
answer"


Lastly,
the
next
code
block
defines
a
custom
tool
for
the
environment,
calculate_molecular_weight, which can be used by agents to perform specific tasks, in
this case, calculating the molecular weight of a given chemical formula.


from
corral.utils
import
tool
20
@tool
def
calculate_molecular_weight (formula: str) -> float:
"""[BRIEF]Calculate
molecular
weight
from
chemical
formula. [/
BRIEF]
Args:
formula: Chemical
formula (e.g., ’H2O ’, ’CH4 ’)
Returns:
Molecular
weight in g/mol
"""
# Implementation
here
pass


E
Detailed Environment Descriptions
We compiled four expert-curated environments, with over 35 domain-specific tools, and over 20
specialized scoring functions.
E.1
Overview of the Environments
We implement multiple environments, covering diverse problems in chemistry and materials research.
Spectra
Spectroscopic analysis is a fundamental technique in chemistry for determining the
structure of unknown compounds, using data from methods such as nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR), infrared (IR) spectroscopy, or mass spectrometry (MS). This environment evaluates LLM
agents on the task of molecular structure elucidation from spectroscopic data, requiring them to plan
the experiments and output a valid SMILES representation of the compounds. This environment
mimics a virtual lab where the agent has to first plan what experiments to run, then propose different
molecular hypotheses based on the different experiments that it performs, validate those hypotheses,
and finally return the valid elucidated molecular structure.
MD
MD simulations are widely used to study the atomic-scale behavior of materials, providing
information on structural, thermal, and mechanical properties at timescales that are difficult to access
experimentally [2]. The MD environment explores the ability of agents to use this technique with
the software LAMMPS [3]. Agents in this environment can retrieve atomic structures from MP [4],
write LAMMPS input scripts, and perform simulations to compute target properties. While the
implementation is shared, we define three separate environments based on the task being performed:
Surface Energy, Melting, and Quenching simulations.
OpenCatalyst
This environment is inspired by the Open Catalyst Project computational work-
flow [5]. Catalysis plays a pivotal role in addressing critical global challenges, including renewable
energy generation (e.g., fuel cells, solar fuels) and sustainable chemical production (e.g., ammonia
synthesis). The discovery of novel catalysts is challenging due to the vast chemical space and diversity
of possible surfaces, terminations, adsorption sites, and adsorbate orientations. This environment
evaluates agents on performing the key and early steps of a typical catalysis simulation pipeline,
which is to create a catalyst slab-adsorbate configuration.
ML
ML models are increasingly used in materials science to accelerate property predictions and
reduce reliance on costly first-principles simulations or experiments. This environment evaluates
agents on constructing and training an XGBoost model [6] to predict the formation energies of oxide,
nitride, and sulphide polymorphs using data from MP. Agents must retrieve relevant crystal structures,
curate polymorph datasets, perform feature engineering, train, and evaluate the model with both test
set metrics and cross-validation, and save the results in a structured format.
Below, we provide detailed descriptions of each environment, including associated tasks and scoring
functions used to evaluate agent performance.
21
E.2
Spectra
This environment simulates a virtual lab, providing tools to run various experimental analyses, such
as carbon or proton NMR. The scoring function of the single task is simply comparing the smiles to
check if they correspond to the same molecule. The different scoring functions of the chained tasks
correspond to counting the number of certain atoms, some functional groups, etc.
E.2.1
Tools
Note that for the experimental tools in the Spectra environment, no arguments are required. This is
because agents are prompted in an environment in which the sample at hand is already loaded into
the experimental equipment. For the actual “experimental” tools, we used simulation tools available
through API services [7, 8, 9, 10]
Table E.2: Spectra Tools. The table describes each tool available in the
spectra environment, including its arguments, return values, and potential
errors.
Tool
get_formula_from_smiles
Arguments:
smiles (string): SMILES representation of a molecule.
Return: Generates the chemical formula of the molecule in Hill notation (C, H, then
alphabetical order). Uses RDKit to parse the SMILES string and compute the
formula. Returns a string formula if successful, or an error message if the SMILES
is invalid.
Raise: Raises Exception for unparseable SMILES strings.
search_by_smiles
Arguments:
smiles (string): SMILES representation of the compound to search for in
the NMRShift database.
top_k (int, optional, default 10): Maximum number of results to return.
Return: Searches the NMRShift database for entries matching or chemically similar to the
provided SMILES. Returns a list of dictionaries containing relevant information
about each compound, such as SMILES, chemical shifts, and other properties.
Results are sorted by similarity score in descending order.
Raise: Raises Exception if the search fails or if top_k is invalid.
retrieve_aromatic_protons_shifts
Arguments: None
Return: Retrieves the proton chemical shift ranges for aromatic hydrocarbons. Returns a
string representation of a list of dictionaries, each containing the type of proton
(e.g., aldehyde, aromatic, alkene) and its corresponding chemical shift range in
ppm relative to TMS.
Raise: No exceptions are raised.
retrieve_carbon_shifts
22
Tool
Arguments: None
Return: Retrieves the carbon chemical shift ranges for various functional groups in or-
ganic compounds. Returns a string representation of a list of dictionaries, each
containing the functional group (e.g., CH3 – , R3C – , ––CH, Ketones, Aldehydes)
and its corresponding chemical shift range in ppm relative to TMS.
Raise: No exceptions are raised.
carbon_nmr_spectra
Arguments: None
Return: Measures
the
13C
NMR
spectra
for
the
given
sample
using
the
get_c13_nmr_prediction function.
Returns the 13C NMR spectra as a
string in ACS-inspired publication format.
Raise: Raises an exception if an error occurs during measurement.
proton_nmr_spectra
Arguments: None
Return: Returns
the
1H
NMR
spectra
for
the
given
compound
using
the
get_h_nmr_prediction function. Provides the 1H NMR spectra as a string
following ACS-inspired publication format.
Raise: Raises an exception if an error occurs during measurement.
ir_spectra
Arguments: None
Return: Returns the IR spectra for the given compound using the get_ir_prediction
function. Provides the IR spectra as a string following standard IR notation.
Raise: Raises an exception if an error occurs during measurement.
hsqc_nmr_spectra
Arguments: None
Return: Returns the HSQC (Heteronuclear Single Quantum Coherence) NMR spectra for
the given compound by making an external API call and formatting the result in
standard NMR notation.
Raise: Raises an exception if an error occurs during measurement or if the HSQC spectrum
is unavailable.
mass_spectrometry_spectra
Arguments: None
Return: Returns the mass spectrometry spectra for the given compound using Electrospray
Ionization (ESI) by making an external API call. Outputs the spectrum in the
format m/z value (intensity), ....
Raise: Raises an exception if an error occurs during measurement or if the SMILES string
is invalid.
23
Tool
retrieve_isotope_distribution
Arguments: None
Return: Returns a predefined dictionary containing the isotopic distribution of common
elements in organic chemistry (C, H, S, Cl, Br, I, F, N, O).
Raise: No calculations or API calls are performed; values are typical for organic com-
pounds.
retrieve_dbe_formula
Arguments: None
Return: Returns the formula for calculating the Double Bond Equivalent (DBE), also
known as Degree of Unsaturation (DU) or Index of Hydrogen Deficiency (IHD).
Raise: No exceptions are raised.
obtain_isomers
Arguments:
smiles (string): SMILES representation of the compound.
Return: Retrieves structural isomers for a given compound using its SMILES representa-
tion. Uses a remote function to query the PubChem database and return a list of
SMILES strings for compounds with the same molecular formula.
Raise: Returns an empty list if no isomers are found.
obtain_isomers_from_molecular_formula
Arguments:
molecular_formula (string): Molecular formula of the compound.
Return: Retrieves structural isomers for a given molecular formula. Uses a remote
function to query the PubChem database and return a list of SMILES strings
for compounds with the same molecular formula.
Raise: Returns an empty list if no isomers are found.
validate_smiles
Arguments:
smiles (string): SMILES representation of the compound.
Return: Validates a SMILES string to check if it represents a valid chemical structure.
Returns True if the conversion is successful (valid SMILES) and False otherwise.
Raise: No exceptions are raised.
E.2.2
Scoring Functions
The scoring functions for the Spectra environment are described in Table E.3. Note that the
score_molecule function is the one used to score the single task.
Table E.3: Spectra scoring functions. The table describes each scoring
function, including its arguments, return values, and behavior.
Function
score_molecule
24
Function
Arguments:
prediction (str, SMILES): Predicted SMILES string.
ground_truth (str, SMILES): Ground truth SMILES string.
Return: Returns 1.0 if the canonical SMILES match, ignoring stereochemistry, otherwise
0.0.
score_molecule_fragments
Arguments:
prediction (list[str] or str): Predicted fragments (list or string).
ground_truth (str, SMILES): Ground truth SMILES string.
Return: Returns 1.0 if all predicted fragments are substructures of the ground truth
molecule, otherwise 0.0.
score_formula_match
Arguments:
prediction (str, formula): Predicted molecular formula.
ground_truth (str, SMILES): Ground truth SMILES string.
Return: Returns 1.0 if predicted molecular formula matches the ground truth formula,
otherwise 0.0.
validate_dbe_consistency
Arguments:
prediction (int): Predicted degree of unsaturation (DBE).
ground_truth (str, SMILES): Ground truth SMILES string.
Return: Returns 1.0 if predicted DBE matches calculated DBE from SMILES, otherwise
0.0.
score_isotopic_distribution
Arguments:
prediction (list[str], element symbols): Predicted isotopic distribution of
elements.
ground_truth (str, SMILES): Ground truth SMILES string.
Return: Returns 1.0 if predicted elements with isotopic distributions match those in the
molecule, otherwise 0.0.
score_num_hydrogen_symmetry_classes
Arguments:
prediction (int): Predicted number of hydrogen symmetry classes.
ground_truth (str, SMILES): Ground truth SMILES string.
Return: Counts unique hydrogen symmetry classes using canonical ranking. Returns 1.0
if predicted count matches, otherwise 0.0.
score_num_carbon_symmetry_classes
Arguments:
prediction (int): Predicted number of carbon symmetry classes.
ground_truth (str, SMILES): Ground truth SMILES string.
Return: Counts unique carbon symmetry classes using canonical ranking. Returns 1.0 if
predicted count matches, otherwise 0.0.
25
Function
score_num_aromatic_carbons
Arguments:
prediction (int): Predicted number of aromatic carbons.
ground_truth (str, SMILES): Ground truth SMILES string.
Return: Counts aromatic carbons in the molecule. Returns 1.0 if predicted count matches,
otherwise 0.0.
score_num_ch3_groups
Arguments:
prediction (int): Predicted number of CH3 (methyl) groups.
ground_truth (str, SMILES): Ground truth SMILES string.
Return: Counts CH3 groups (methyl) in the molecule. Returns 1.0 if predicted count
matches, otherwise 0.0.
score_num_carbonyl_groups
Arguments:
prediction (int): Predicted number of carbonyl groups.
ground_truth (str, SMILES): Ground truth SMILES string.
Return: Counts carbonyl groups (C––O) in the canonical tautomer of the molecule. Re-
turns 1.0 if predicted count matches, otherwise 0.0.
E.2.3
Tasks and Subtasks
Here, we present the prompts for a single task along with its associated subtasks. The structure and
format are consistent across other tasks within the Spectra environment. Note that for these tasks,
there are no input parameters since the different machines are already configured.
Organic Compound Analysis
Analyze the provided organic compound sample in a lab environment and output the SMILES
string, while minimizing resource consumption due to the costly nature of the process.
Subtask 1: Molecular Formula
State the molecular formula for the compound analyzed.
Subtask 2: Double Bond Equivalents (DBE)
Calculate the Double Bond Equivalents (DBE) for the compound analyzed. Provide
your answer as an integer.
Subtask 3: Identify Elements from Mass Spectrum
Based on the isotope distribution patterns visible in the mass spectrum, list all
elements that can be definitively identified. Format your answer as a list of element
symbols: [ëlement1¨, ëlement2¨, ëlement3¨].
26
Subtask 4: Chemically Equivalent Carbon Atoms
How many different types of chemically equivalent carbon atoms are present in this
compound? (Count the number of unique carbon environments, not the total number
of carbons)
Subtask 5: Chemically Equivalent Hydrogen Atoms
How many different types of chemically equivalent hydrogen atoms are present in
this compound? (Count the number of unique hydrogen environments, not the total
number of hydrogens)
Subtask 6: Aromatic Carbons Count
State the count of aromatic carbons in the molecule.
Subtask 7: Methyl Groups Count
How many methyl (CH3) groups are present in the sample’s molecule?
Subtask 8: Carbonyl Groups Count
Indicate the number of C=O groups present in the molecule.
Subtask 9: SMILES for Connected Fragments
Return the SMILES strings for the connected fragments of the compound.
Subtask 10: Complete SMILES
Provide the SMILES string representing the compound in the sample.
E.3
MD
We deploy the LAMMPS package [3] using the Modal Inference serverless infrastructure [11]. All
input/output operations and tool executions are integrated with the Modal platform. This gives the
flexibility to execute LAMMPS simulations without requiring local or cloud-based installation, and it
automatically provides computational resources at the time of running the simulation. Structure files
and potential files required for MD simulations are stored in separate volumes, which the agent can
access directly during execution. Table E.4 lists the types of potentials available to the agent and the
corresponding materials.
Table E.4: Potentials available to the agent.
Potential Type
Applicable Materials
Embedded Atom Method (EAM)
Aluminum, Magnesium, Copper
ReaxFF
Silicon, Alpha-Quartz, Wollastonite
27
This environment provides the underlying implementation for three task environments: Surface
Energy, Melting Dynamics, and Quenching Dynamics.
E.3.1
Tools
Table E.5 provides a detailed description of the tools used in the MD environment, including what their
arguments, return objects, and the possible exceptions raised.
Table E.5: Tools for the MD environment. The table describes each tool
available in this environment, including its arguments, return values, and
potential errors.
Tool
get_potential_metadata
Arguments:
file_path (string): Path to the LAMMPS potential file.
Return: Returns structured metadata: potential type, supported elements, pair style.
Raise: Raises ValueError if file is unrecognized or empty.
get_structure_from_mp_text
Arguments:
mp_id (string): Materials Project ID.
file_path (string): Destination path for the CIF file.
Return/Behavior: Retrieves crystal structure from Materials Project, saves CIF file, and
returns a confirmation message.
Raise: Raises Exception if retrieval or saving fails.
convert_structure_to_lammps_data
Arguments:
structure_path (string): Path to the CIF file.
output_file (string): Output LAMMPS data path.
atom_style (string, optional, default “charge”): Atom style for LAMMPS
conversion.
Return/Behavior: Converts CIF to a LAMMPS .data file using the specified atom style.
Returns a confirmation message.
Raise: Raises Exception if the files are invalid or the atom style is unsupported.
run_lammps
Arguments:
input_file (string): Path to the LAMMPS input script.
Return/Behavior: Runs LAMMPS simulation via a remote backend, generates a .log
file, and returns a success message with the log file path.
Raise: Raises ValueError for simulation errors or a generic Exception for unexpected
issues.
E.3.2
Scoring Functions
For each task environment, the ground truth is generated using predefined simulation parameters.
Agents are then evaluated by comparing their outputs against this ground truth, given the same
simulation parameters. For numerical outputs, a tolerance of 2% is applied to account for stochastic
variations in molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.
28
Table E.6: Scoring Functions in the MD environment. The table de-
scribes each scoring function available in this environment, including its
arguments, return values, and behavior.
Function
check_potential_file
Arguments:
target (string): Path to the reference potential file.
Return: Returns a scoring function. Checks if the result filename matches target and
verifies file existence via Modal. Returns 1.0 if both pass, otherwise 0.0.
check_numerical
Arguments:
target (float): Expected numerical value.
tolerance (float): Allowed relative tolerance.
Return: Returns a scoring function. Parses the numeric result (string, JSON, or dict),
compares against target ± tolerance, and checks associated file existence via
Modal. Returns 1.0 if all checks pass, otherwise 0.0.
check_structure
Arguments:
target (string): Path to the reference LAMMPS .data file.
atom_style (string): LAMMPS atom style.
Return: Returns a scoring function. Reads remote LAMMPS .data result via Modal,
loads reference and result structures with pymatgen’s LammpsData, compares
using StructureMatcher. Returns 1.0 if structures match, otherwise 0.0. Tem-
porary files are automatically cleaned.
E.3.3
Tasks and Subtasks
Here we provide an example of a task and its associated subtask prompts for Aluminum in each task
environment. The prompt structure is similar for other materials.
Surface Energy of Aluminum
Calculate the surface energy of Aluminum for the given surface by removing periodic
boundary conditions in the given direction and computing the energy difference per unit
area between the relaxed bulk and the relaxed slab configuration. Use the Embedded Atom
Method (EAM) potential and the following simulation parameters. The simulation should
replicate the unit cell 5 times in each of the x, y, and z directions. Return the surface energy
in electronvolts/Å2 units.
Input Parameters:
{
"units ": "metal",
"minimiser ": "conjugate
gradient",
" energy_tolerance ": 1e-10,
" force_tolerance ": 1e-10,
" maximum_iterations ": 100000.0 ,
" maximum_evaluations ": 100000.0 ,
" materials_project_id ": "mp -134" ,
"direction ": [0, 0, 1],
"atom_style ": "atomic"
}
29
Subtask 1 : Retrieve Aluminum Structure
Description: Retrieve structure of Aluminum and convert it to LAMMPS data format.
Return the absolute path of the final structure.
Input Parameters:
{
" materials_project_id ": "mp -134" ,
"atom_style ": "atomic"
}
Subtask 2 : Procure EAM Potential File
Description: Procure the appropriate Embedded Atom Method (EAM) potential file
for Aluminum for MD simulations. Return the absolute path to the potential file.
Input Parameters: None
Subtask 3 : Bulk Relaxation for Surface Energy
Description: Given paths to LAMMPS-compatible structure file and EAM potential
file, perform structure relaxation of Aluminum (5×5×5 replication). Report total
energy (eV) and saved path.
Input Parameters:
{
"units ": "metal",
"pbc": "true",
"minimiser ": "conjugate
gradient",
" energy_tolerance ": 1e-10,
" force_tolerance ": 1e-10,
" maximum_iterations ": 1e+5,
" maximum_evaluations ": 1e+5,
"atom_style ": "atomic"
}
Subtask 4 : Slab Relaxation for Surface Energy
Description: Create a slab by removing periodic boundary conditions along the given
direction, perform structure relaxation (5×5×5 replication). Report total energy (eV)
and saved path.
Input Parameters:
{
"units ": "metal",
"minimiser ": "conjugate
gradient",
" energy_tolerance ": 1e-10,
" force_tolerance ": 1e-10,
" maximum_iterations ": 1e+5,
" maximum_evaluations ": 1e+5,
"atom_style ": "atomic",
"direction ": [0, 0, 1]
}
30
Subtask 5 : Surface Energy Calculation
Description: Compute surface energy from relaxed bulk and slab structures. Return
energy in eV/Å2.
Input Parameters: None
Aluminum Melting Simulation
Simulate the melting of Aluminum by first equilibrating the system under NVT conditions,
then relaxing it under NPT conditions, followed by a heating stage under NPT where the
temperature is gradually increased to induce melting. Use the Embedded Atom Method
(EAM) potential and the given simulation parameters. The simulation should replicate the
unit cell 5 times in each direction. Report the final density of the system in g/cm3.
Input Parameters:
{
"units ": "metal",
"pbc": "true",
"timestep ": "1 femtosecond",
"nvt steps ": 10000 ,
"nvt
temperature ": 300,
"nvt
thermostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"npt
relaxation
steps ": 10000 ,
"npt
relaxation
temperature ": 300,
"npt
relaxation
pressure ": 0,
"npt
relaxation
thermostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"npt
relaxation
barostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"npt
heating
steps ": 20000 ,
"npt
heating
initial
temperature ": 300,
"npt
heating
final
temperature ": 2000 ,
"npt
heating
pressure ": 0,
" npt_heating_thermostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
" npt_heating_barostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
" materials_project_id ": "mp -134" ,
"atom_style ": "atomic"
}
Subtask 1: Retrieve Aluminum Structure
Retrieve structure of Aluminum and convert it to LAMMPS data format. Return the
absolute path of the final structure.
Input Parameters:
{
" materials_project_id ": "mp -134" ,
"atom_style ": "atomic"
}
Subtask 2: Procure EAM Potential File
Procure the appropriate Embedded Atom Method (EAM) potential file for Aluminum
for MD simulations. Return the absolute path to the potential file.
Input Parameters: None
31
Subtask 3: NVT Equilibration
Given paths to LAMMPS-compatible Aluminum structure file and EAM potential
file, equilibrate the system under NVT conditions. Replicate the unit cell 5×5×5.
Return the absolute path of the equilibrated structure and final density (g/cm3).
Input Parameters:
{
"units ": "metal",
"pbc": "true",
"timestep ": "1 femtosecond",
"nvt steps ": 10000 ,
"nvt
temperature ": 300,
"nvt
thermostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"atom_style ": "atomic"
}
Subtask 4: NPT Relaxation
Given paths to NVT equilibrated Aluminum structure and EAM potential file, relax
the system under NPT conditions. Return the absolute path of the relaxed structure
and density (g/cm3).
Input Parameters:
{
"units ": "metal",
"pbc": "true",
"timestep ": "1 femtosecond",
"npt
relaxation
steps ": 10000 ,
"npt
relaxation
temperature ": 300,
"npt
relaxation
pressure ": 0,
"npt
relaxation
thermostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"npt
relaxation
barostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"atom_style ": "atomic"
}
32
Subtask 5: NPT Heating / Melting Simulation
Given paths to NPT equilibrated Aluminum structure and EAM potential file, simulate
melting by heating under NPT to gradually increase temperature. Report the final
density (g/cm3).
Input Parameters:
{
"units ": "metal",
"pbc": "true",
"timestep ": "1 femtosecond",
"npt
heating
steps ": 20000 ,
"npt
heating
initial
temperature ": 300,
"npt
heating
final
temperature ": 2000 ,
"npt
heating
pressure ": 0,
" npt_heating_thermostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
" npt_heating_barostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"atom_style ": "atomic"
}
Aluminum Quenching Simulation
Simulate the quenching process of Aluminum by cooling its molten structure under NPT
conditions, followed by relaxation under NPT and NVT conditions. Use the Embedded Atom
Method (EAM) potential and the given simulation parameters. Report the final density of the
system in g/cm3.
Input Parameters:
{
"path to molten
structure ": "/ structures/task_30/
heatedsystem_3000_reax .dat",
"units ": "metal",
"pbc": "true",
"timestep ": "1 femtosecond",
"npt quench
steps ": 20000 ,
"npt quench
initial
temperature ": 2000 ,
"npt quench
final
temperature ": 300,
"npt quench
pressure ": 0,
"npt quench
thermostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"npt quench
barostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"npt
relaxation
steps ": 10000 ,
"npt
relaxation
temperature ": 300,
"npt
relaxation
pressure ": 0,
"npt
relaxation
thermostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"npt
relaxation
barostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"nvt steps ": 10000 ,
"nvt
temperature ": 300,
"nvt
thermostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
" materials_project_id ": "mp -134" ,
"atom_style ": "atomic"
}
33
Subtask 1: Procure EAM Potential File
Procure the appropriate Embedded Atom Method (EAM) potential file for Aluminum
for MD simulations. Return the absolute path to the potential file.
Input Parameters: None
Subtask 2: NPT Quenching
Given paths to LAMMPS-compatible molten Aluminum structure and EAM potential
file, simulate the quenching process by cooling the molten structure under NPT
conditions. Return the absolute path of the cooled structure and the density in g/cm3.
Input Parameters:
{
"path to molten
structure ": "/ structures/task_30/
heatedsystem_3000_reax .dat",
"units ": "metal",
"pbc": "true",
"timestep ": "1 femtosecond",
"npt quench
steps ": 20000 ,
"npt quench
initial
temperature ": 2000 ,
"npt quench
final
temperature ": 300,
"npt quench
pressure ": 0,
"npt quench
thermostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"npt quench
barostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"atom_style ": "atomic"
}
Subtask 3: NPT Relaxation
Given paths to LAMMPS-compatible Aluminum structure and EAM potential file,
relax the structure under NPT conditions. Return the absolute path of the relaxed
structure and density (g/cm3).
Input Parameters:
{
"units ": "metal",
"pbc": "true",
"timestep ": "1 femtosecond",
"npt
relaxation
steps ": 10000 ,
"npt
relaxation
temperature ": 300,
"npt
relaxation
pressure ": 0,
"npt
relaxation
thermostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"npt
relaxation
barostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"atom_style ": "atomic"
}
34
Subtask 4: NVT Relaxation
Given paths to LAMMPS-compatible Aluminum structure and EAM potential file,
relax the structure under NVT conditions. Report the final density (g/cm3).
Input Parameters:
{
"units ": "metal",
"pbc": "true",
"timestep ": "1 femtosecond",
"nvt steps ": 10000 ,
"nvt
temperature ": 300,
"nvt
thermostat ": "Nose -Hoover",
"atom_style ": "atomic"
}
E.4
OpenCatalyst
E.4.1
Tools
The tools of the OpenCatalyst environment are described in Table E.7. These tools are highly based
on functions from the Pymatgen package [12].
Table E.7: OpenCatalyst tools. This table describes each tool available
in the environment, including its arguments, return values, and potential
errors.
Tool
get_structure_from_mp_text
Arguments:
mp_id (string): Materials Project identifier string. The unique identifier
used by Materials Project to catalog materials, in the format “mp-XXXXX”.
Return: Returns a CIF content string containing the crystal structure data, including lattice
parameters, atomic positions, space group, and symmetry operations.
Raise:
ConnectionError: If unable to connect to the Materials Project API due to
network issues or server downtime.
KeyError: If the specified MP ID is not found in the database, indicating an
invalid or non-existent material ID.
AuthenticationError: If the API key is invalid or missing, preventing access
to the Materials Project database.
enumerate_slabs_text
35
Tool
Arguments:
bulk_cif (string): Bulk crystal structure in CIF string format.
miller_index (tuple): Miller indices for surface orientation. Defaults to
(1,1,1).
min_slab_size (float): Minimum slab thickness in Angstroms. Defaults to 12.
min_vacuum_size (float): Minimum vacuum layer thickness in Angstroms.
Defaults to 5.
Return: Returns a JSON string mapping slab indices to their CIF representations.
Raise:
ValueError: If CIF string is malformed or parameters are invalid.
StructureError: If slab generation fails for the given structure.
choose_slab_text
Arguments:
slabs_json (string): JSON string mapping slab keys to CIF strings. A
JSON-formatted string containing a dictionary where keys are slab identifiers
(e.g., “slab_0”, “slab_1”) and values are the corresponding CIF strings.
index (int, optional): Index of the slab to select. Defaults to 0. The numerical
index of the slab to select from the JSON dictionary.
Return: Returns a CIF string for the selected slab, containing atomic positions, lattice
parameters, and other crystallographic information.
Raise:
ValueError: Raised if the specified slab index is not found in the JSON dictio-
nary.
JSONDecodeError: Raised if the slabs_json string is not valid JSON.
get_adsorption_sites_text
Arguments:
slab_cif (string): CIF string of the surface slab structure, including atomic
positions, lattice parameters, and surface geometry.
Return: Returns a JSON string containing classified adsorption sites with fractional
coordinates.
Raise:
ValueError: If the CIF string is malformed or doesn’t represent a valid slab.
StructureError: If the slab structure cannot be analyzed for adsorption sites
due to geometric issues.
choose_adsorption_site_text
Arguments:
adsorption_sites_json (string): A valid JSON string containing clas-
sified adsorption sites, where keys are site types (e.g., “ontop”, “bridge”,
“hollow”) and values are lists of fractional coordinates.
site_type (string): The type of adsorption site to select (e.g., “ontop”, “bridge”,
“hollow”).
index (integer, optional): The index of the site to select within the specified site
type. Defaults to 0.
Return: Returns a list of three floating-point numbers representing the fractional coordi-
nates [x, y, z] of the selected adsorption site.
Raise:
ValueError: If the specified site_type is not found in the JSON string.
IndexError: If the specified index is out of range for the available sites of the
specified site_type.
JSONDecodeError: If the adsorption_sites_json string is not valid JSON.
36
Tool
add_adsorbate_to_slab_text
Arguments:
slab_cif (string): CIF string of the surface slab structure.
adsorbate_cif (string): CIF or XYZ string of the adsorbate molecule structure.
height (float, optional): Height in Angstroms above the surface for adsorbate
placement (default is 2.0).
site (list of floats or None, optional): Fractional coordinates for adsorbate
placement [x, y, z], or None to auto-select site (default is None).
Return: Returns a CIF string of the combined surface-adsorbate structure.
Raise:
ValueError: If CIF strings are malformed or the adsorbate cannot be parsed.
StructureError: If adsorbate placement fails due to geometric constraints.
RuntimeError: If no adsorption sites are found on the surface.
E.4.2
Scoring Functions
Table E.8 describes the different scoring function used for scoring the OpenCatalyst environment
within the Corral environment.
Table E.8: OpenCatalyst scoring functions, their arguments, and return
values.
Function
resolve_path
Arguments:
path_or_str (str): Path or string to resolve.
Return: Returns the resolved path as a string.
check_valid_json_file
Arguments:
json_path (str): File path to the JSON file.
Return: Returns 1.0 if a valid, non-empty JSON file exists at the path; otherwise, 0.0.
check_slabs_json
Arguments:
slabs_json (str): JSON string or file path containing slab data.
Return: Returns 1.0 if the JSON contains at least one valid slab (parsable CIF); otherwise
0.0.
check_mp_structure
Arguments:
path_or_cif (str): CIF string or file path.
Return: Returns 1.0 if a valid CIF structure from Materials Project; otherwise, 0.0.
check_slab_structure
Arguments:
path_or_cif (str): CIF string or file path.
Return: Returns 1.0 if a valid slab structure; otherwise, 0.0.
37
Function
check_co2_molecule_structure
Arguments:
path_or_cif (str): CIF string or file path.
Return: Returns 1.0 if the structure contains exactly one CO2 molecule (1 C, 2 O atoms);
otherwise, 0.0.
check_adsorption_structure
Arguments:
slab_elements (list[str]): List of slab elements.
adsorbate_elements (list[str]): List of adsorbate elements.
Return: Returns a scoring function that scores 1.0 if the structure contains both slab and
adsorbate elements; otherwise, it scores 0.0.
check_adsorption_sites
Arguments:
sites_json_or_path (str): JSON string or file path containing adsorption
sites.
Return: Returns 1.0 if the adsorption sites JSON contains at least one recognized site type
with valid 3D coordinates; otherwise, 0.0.
E.4.3
Tasks and Subtasks
Here we provide an example of a task and its associated subtask prompts for CO2 adsorption on
Cu2O. The prompt structure is similar for other compounds.
CO2 Adsorption on Cu2O Slab
Create a CO2 adsorbed structure on a Silicon/Cu2O slab. Submit the path to the final combined
structure CIF file.
Input Parameters:
{
"mp_id ": "mp -149" ,
"co2_mp_id ": "mp -644607" ,
"miller_index ": [1, 1, 1],
"min_slab_size ": 12,
" min_vacuum_size ": 5,
"slab_index ": 0,
"site_type ": "ontop",
"site_index ": 0,
"height ": 2.0
}
38
Subtask 1: Retrieve Bulk Structure
Retrieve structure of Cu2O from Materials Project and save it as a CIF file. Submit
the path to the CIF file.
Input Parameters:
{
"mp_id ": "mp -361"
}
Subtask 2: Enumerate Slabs
Enumerate possible slabs from the bulk Cu2O structure and save the result as a JSON
file. Submit the path to the JSON file.
Input Parameters:
{
"miller_index ": [1, 1, 1],
"min_slab_size ": 12,
" min_vacuum_size ": 5
}
Subtask 3: Select Slab
Choose one slab from the enumerated slabs (by index) and save it as a CIF file.
Submit the path to the CIF file.
Input Parameters:
{
"index ": 0
}
Subtask 4: Retrieve CO2 Molecule
Retrieve CO2 molecule structure from Materials Project and save it as a CIF file.
Submit the path to the CIF file.
Input Parameters:
{
"mp_id ": "mp -644607"
}
Subtask 5: Determine Adsorption Sites
Determine possible adsorption sites on the chosen slab and save the results as a JSON
file. Submit the path to the JSON file.
Input Parameters: None
39
Subtask 6: Select Adsorption Site
Choose one adsorption site (preferably ontop site) from the identified sites and save
the coordinates to a file. Submit the path to the file.
Input Parameters:
{
"site_type ": "ontop",
"index ": 0
}
Subtask 7: Place CO2 on Slab
Place the CO2 molecule on the chosen slab at the specified adsorption site with a
height of approximately 2.0 Å and save the combined structure as a CIF file. Submit
the path to the CIF file.
Scoring Parameters:
{
"slab_elements ": ["Cu", "O"],
" adsorbate_elements ": ["C", "O"]
}
E.5
ML
E.5.1
Tools
Table E.9 shows the different tools available for the agents when working in the ML environment.
Table E.9: ML tools, their arguments, and return values.
Tool
get_bulk_polymorphs_data
Arguments:
composition (string): Chemical formula specifying the composition for
which polymorphs should be retrieved. Should follow standard chemical
notation (e.g., TiO2, Al2O3).
Return: Returns a JSON string containing comprehensive polymorph data, sorted by
energy above hull. The data includes properties like Materials Project ID, CIF
structure, energy above hull, formation energy per atom, band gap, density, volume,
number of sites, space group, and stability information.
Raise:
KeyError: Raised when the specified composition is not found in the database.
ValueError: Raised when the Materials Project API key is not available.
ConnectionError: Raised when there is a failure to connect to the Materials
Project API.
get_bulk_polymorphs_data_to_file
40
Tool
Arguments:
composition (string): Chemical formula specifying the composition for
which polymorphs should be retrieved. Example: TiO2 (titanium dioxide),
"Al2O3" (aluminum oxide).
save_path (string or None): Path where JSON data will be saved. Must include
the filename with .json extension. If None, an error is raised.
Return: Returns the file path where polymorph data was saved in JSON format.
Raise:
ValueError: If save_path is None or API key is missing.
IOError: If unable to write to the specified file path (e.g., directory does not
exist or is not writable).
batch_retrieve_polymorphs
Arguments:
compositions (list of strings): List of chemical compositions to retrieve
polymorphs for.
max_energy_above_hull (float, optional): Maximum energy above hull
threshold in eV/atom. Defaults to 0.5.
max_per_composition (int, optional): Maximum number of polymorphs per
composition. Defaults to 10.
save_directory (string, optional): Directory path for saving individual com-
position files. Defaults to “polymorph_data”.
work_dir (string, optional): Working directory for the tool (hidden argument).
Return: Returns a JSON string containing batch retrieval results and statistics, including
successful and failed compositions, total number of polymorphs, and file paths for
each composition.
Raise: Raises
ValueError
if
parameters
are
invalid
(negative
energy,
zero
max_per_composition). Raises IOError if unable to create the save directory or
write files.
sort_and_get_first_from_json
Arguments:
polymorph_data_json (string): JSON string containing the data to be
sorted, structured as a list of dictionaries with numerical properties for sort-
ing.
sort_key (string): Property name to sort the data by (e.g., “energy_above_hull”,
“band_gap”, “density”).
return_key (string): Property name to return from the first element after sorting
(e.g., "material_id", "cif").
Return: Returns the value of the specified return_key from the first element after sorting.
Raise:
JSONDecodeError: If the polymorph_data_json is not valid JSON.
KeyError: If sort_key or return_key are not found in the data.
IndexError: If the JSON data is empty or contains no elements.
select_polymorphs_with_strategy
41
Tool
Arguments:
polymorphs_data (string): JSON string or file path containing polymorph
data.
selection_strategy (string, optional): “diverse_energy”, “most_stable”,
or “diverse_structure” to determine selection method.
Defaults to “di-
verse_energy"”.
max_polymorphs (int, optional): Maximum number of polymorphs to select.
Defaults to 5.
energy_threshold (float, optional): Maximum energy above hull in eV/atom.
Defaults to 0.5.
is_path (bool, optional): Whether polymorphs_data is a file path. Defaults
to False.
Return: Returns a JSON string containing selected polymorphs based on the specified
strategy.
Raises:
ValueError: If invalid selection strategy is specified.
FileNotFoundError: If is_path=True but file doesn’t exist.
JSONDecodeError: If polymorphs_data contains invalid JSON.
consolidate_polymorph_datasets
Arguments:
composition_files (dict): Dictionary mapping compositions to their
JSON file paths.
output_path (string, optional): Path for the consolidated dataset (default: “con-
solidated_polymorphs.json”).
work_dir (string, optional): Working directory for intermediate steps (hidden
argument).
Return: Returns a JSON-formatted string with consolidation results and detailed statistics
(e.g., total polymorphs, number of compositions included, etc.).
Raise:
FileNotFoundError: If one or more input files cannot be found.
JSONDecodeError: If input files contain invalid JSON.
IOError: If unable to write to the output path.
select_polymorphs_with_strategy_to_file
42
Tool
Arguments:
polymorphs_data (string): JSON string or file path containing polymorph
data.
save_path (string): File path where selected polymorphs will be saved in JSON
format.
selection_strategy
(string):
selection
strategy
(“diverse_energy”,
“most_stable”, “diverse_structure”). Default is diverse_energy.
max_polymorphs (int): Maximum number of polymorphs to select. Default is
5.
energy_threshold (float): Maximum energy above hull in eV/atom. Default
is 0.5.
is_path (bool): Whether polymorphs_data is a file path. Default is False.
work_dir (string | None): Directory to work in (optional).
Return: Returns the file path where the selected polymorphs were saved.
Raise:
ValueError: If an invalid selection strategy is specified.
FileNotFoundError: If is_path=True but the input file doesn’t exist.
IOError: If unable to write to the save_path location.
filter_json_with_strategy
Arguments:
input_json_path (string): Path to the input JSON file to be filtered.
output_json_path (string): Path where filtered JSON data will be saved.
custom_code (string | None): Python code string defining the filtering logic.
work_dir (string | None): Directory to work in, optional.
Return: Returns a JSON string with filtering results and comprehensive statistics, includ-
ing original and filtered data counts, output file path, and reduction percentage.
Raise:
FileNotFoundError: Raised when the input JSON file doesn’t exist.
JSONDecodeError: Raised when the input file contains invalid JSON.
SyntaxError: Raised when the custom filtering code contains syntax errors.
RuntimeError: Raised when the custom filtering code fails during execution.
prepare_tabular_dataset
43
Tool
Arguments:
polymorphs_json_path (string): Path to consolidated polymorphs JSON
file containing material properties and crystal structures.
output_path (string): Base directory and filename prefix for saving the dataset
files.
target_property (string, optional): Property to predict (defaults to “forma-
tion_energy_per_atom”).
feature_engineering (string): feature engineering strategy (“basic”, “ad-
vanced”, “custom”).
test_split (float, optional): Fraction of data for test set (defaults to 0.2).
normalize (bool, optional): Whether to normalize features (defaults to True).
work_dir (string, optional): Working directory for intermediate files.
Return: Returns a JSON string with dataset preparation results, including file paths for
training and test data, and other metadata.
Raise:
FileNotFoundError if the polymorphs JSON file is not found.
KeyError if the target property is not found in the data.
ValueError if feature engineering fails or the data format is invalid.
evaluate_xgboost_model
Arguments:
model_path (string): Path to the saved XGBoost model file.
test_data_path (string): Path to the test data CSV file with the same structure
as the training data.
target_column (string, default = "“formation_energy_per_atom”): The column
name in the test data representing the target variable for evaluation.
detailed_analysis (bool, default = True): Whether to include detailed analy-
sis and feature importance in the results.
Return: Returns a JSON string containing evaluation success status and metrics, including
MAE, RMSE, R2, MAPE, prediction ranges, error analysis, and feature impor-
tance (if detailed analysis is enabled).
Raise:
FileNotFoundError: Raised when the model file or test data file doesn’t exist.
KeyError: Raised when the target column is not found in the test data.
ValueError: Raised when the model and data are incompatible or contain
invalid values.
train_xgboost_model
44
Tool
Arguments:
train_data_path (string): Path to the training data CSV file containing
features and target column.
test_data_path (string): Path to the test data CSV file, with the same structure
as the training data.
model_save_path (string): Path to save the trained model file in .pkl format.
target_column (string, default=“formation_energy_per_atom”): Name of the
target column for prediction in the dataset.
hyperparameters (dict | None, optional): Dictionary of XGBoost hyperparam-
eters to override default values.
work_dir (string | None, optional): Working directory path, if provided.
Return: Returns a JSON-formatted string with comprehensive training results, including
model performance metrics (MAE, RMSE, R2), feature importance, and the model
path.
Raises:
FileNotFoundError: Raised when the specified CSV files do not exist.
KeyError: Raised when the target column does not exist in the dataset.
ValueError: Raised when the data contains invalid values or formatting issues.
perform_cross_validation
Arguments:
train_data_path (string): Path to the training data CSV file.
target_column (string): Name of the target column for prediction (default:
“formation_energy_per_atom”).
cv_folds (int): Number of cross-validation folds (default: 5).
hyperparameters (dict or None):
XGBoost hyperparameters for cross-
validation (default: None).
Return: Returns a JSON string containing comprehensive cross-validation results and
statistical analysis, including R2, MAE, and other performance metrics.
Raise:
FileNotFoundError: Raised if the training data file does not exist or is not
found.
KeyError: Raised if the target column is not found in the dataset.
ValueError: Raised if the number of cross-validation folds is invalid or the
data contains invalid values.
E.5.2
Scoring Functions
Table E.10 show and describe the scoring functions used in the ML environment.
Table E.10: Scoring Functions for the ML Environment. The table
describes each scoring function, its arguments, return values, and potential
behaviors.
Function
check_mp_structure
Arguments:
path_or_cif (string): Path to CIF file or CIF string.
Return: Returns 1.0 if the input is a valid CIF string or file representing a non-empty
structure (via pymatgen.Structure), otherwise 0.0.
45
Function
compare_with_ground_truth
Arguments:
generated_path (string): Path to generated JSON file.
ground_truth_path (string): Path to reference JSON file.
comparison_mode (string, optional): “strict“, “keys“, “numerical“, or “subset“.
tolerance (float, optional): Numerical tolerance.
Return: Returns 1.0 if the generated file matches the ground truth according to the chosen
mode, otherwise 0.0. Modes control the exactness of comparison (structure, keys,
numerical values, subset).
ml_pipeline_score
Arguments:
model_path (string): Path to trained ML model file.
Return: Returns a float score (0.0-1.0) evaluating the completeness and performance of
an ML pipeline, including model loading, evaluation metrics, and cross-validation
evidence.
polymorph_retrieval_success
Arguments:
retrieval_results_path (string): Path to JSON retrieval results.
Return: Returns a float score (0.0-1.0) based on polymorph retrieval success rate, total
number retrieved, and distribution per composition.
score_polymorph_dataset
Arguments:
consolidated_json_path (string): Path to consolidated polymorph
dataset JSON.
Return: Returns 1.0 if at least one composition has multiple polymorphs, otherwise 0.0.
ml_dataset_preparation_quality_binary
Arguments:
ml_metadata_path (string): Path to ML dataset metadata JSON.
Return: Returns 1 if dataset preparation meets all criteria: existing train/test files, sufficient
sample sizes, and adequate feature count; otherwise returns 0.
model_training_success_binary
Arguments:
model_path (string): Path to trained model file.
Return: Returns 1 if model can be loaded, has a predict method, and meets performance
thresholds (R2 ≥0.5, MAE ≤0.5), otherwise 0.
model_evaluation_completeness_binary
Arguments:
evaluation_results_path (string): Path to model evaluation results
JSON.
Return: Returns 1 if evaluation results are complete: includes required metrics (MAE,
RMSE, R2), R2 ≥0.7, cross-validation stats, feature importance, and detailed
analysis; otherwise returns 0.
46
E.5.3
Tasks and Subtasks
Here we provide an example of a task and its associated subtask prompts for oxide. The prompt
structure is similar for sulphide and nitride compounds.
Oxide Polymorph Dataset and XGBoost Model
Generate a comprehensive dataset of oxide polymorphs from Materials Project and train
an XGBoost model to predict formation energies. Evaluate the trained XGBoost model
using test set and cross-validation metrics. Save the results as a JSON file with keys
test_set_evaluation and cross_validation_results. The test_set_evaluation
dictionary
must
contain
mae,
rmse,
r2,
and
feature_importance.
The
cross_validation_results dictionary must contain r2_mean and r2_std.
Input Parameters:
{
" max_energy_above_hull ": 0.3,
" max_per_composition ": 3,
" max_compositions ": 40,
" target_property ": " formation_energy_per_atom ",
" feature_engineering ": "advanced",
"test_split ": 0.2,
"normalize ": true ,
"n_estimators ": 200,
"max_depth ": 8,
"learning_rate ": 0.1,
"subsample ": 0.8,
" colsample_bytree ": 0.8,
"reg_alpha ": 0.1,
"reg_lambda ": 0.1,
" detailed_analysis ": true ,
"cv_folds ": 5
}
Subtask 1: Generate Oxide Polymorph Dataset
Generate a diverse list of oxide compositions for dataset creation. Retrieve poly-
morphs for all oxide compositions from Materials Project database. For each compo-
sition, collect multiple polymorphs including both stable and metastable structures.
Consolidate all individual polymorph files into a single comprehensive dataset. Each
entry should have source_composition.
Input Parameters:
{
" max_energy_above_hull ": 0.3,
" max_per_composition ": 3,
" max_compositions ": 40
}
47
Subtask 2: Prepare ML Dataset
Transform the consolidated dataset into ML-ready format with engineered fea-
tures and proper train/test splits. Create a metadata JSON file with features,
train_path, and test_path.
Input Parameters:
{
" target_property ": " formation_energy_per_atom ",
" feature_engineering ": "advanced",
"test_split ": 0.2,
"normalize ": true ,
"output_path ": " oxide_ml_dataset "
}
Subtask 3: Train XGBoost Model
Train an XGBoost regression model to predict formation energies of oxide poly-
morphs. Use the prepared dataset with optimized hyperparameters for oxide materials.
Focus on achieving good generalization performance across different oxide families
and structural types.
Input Parameters:
{
"target_column ": " formation_energy_per_atom ",
" hyperparameters ": {
"n_estimators ": 200,
"max_depth ": 8,
"learning_rate ": 0.1,
"subsample ": 0.8,
" colsample_bytree ": 0.8,
"reg_alpha ": 0.1,
"reg_lambda ": 0.1
}
}
Subtask 4: Evaluate Model
Evaluate the trained XGBoost model using test set and cross-validation met-
rics.
Save the results as a JSON file with keys test_set_evaluation
and
cross_validation_results.
The
test_set_evaluation
dic-
tionary must contain mae,
rmse,
r2,
and feature_importance.
The
cross_validation_results dictionary must contain r2_mean and r2_std.
Input Parameters:
{
"target_column ": " formation_energy_per_atom ",
" detailed_analysis ": true ,
"cv_folds ": 5
}
48
F
Pass∧k
Beyond the standard pass@5 metric, we also computed the pass∧5 score (more details about the
metrics are presented in Appendix A). The results, presented in Figure F.1 for the four environments,
two agents, and two LLMs, reveal trends highly consistent with those of pass@5 (see Figure 3).
Specifically, Spectra and MD perform notably poorly, while OpenCatalyst achieves near-perfect
scores. A key observation, however, is the pronounced decline in performance for the ML environment
under the pass∧5 metric. Its scores decreased substantially from the pass@5 assessment, falling to a
level comparable with those of the MD environment. This, we hypothesize, may be because of the
distance between tasks being comparable to those of the Spectra environment. As for pass@5, no
trends are observed among the different agents and LLMs that were evaluated.
Figure F.1: pass∧5 scores across evaluated environments, agents, and LLMs. Performance trends
largely align with those of pass@5, with OpenCatalyst achieving near-perfect scores and Spectra
and MD performing poorly. A pronounced deviation is observed for the ML environment, where a
substantial performance decline under the pass∧5 metric suggests agents struggle to solve its tasks
consistently. This decline may be attributed to the increased inter-task distance, which appears
comparable to that of the Spectra environment. No significant trends were identified across different
agents or LLMs.
49
G
Number of Tool Calls
The number of tool calls executed by the agents constitutes another metric captured in Corral.
While straightforward to quantify, this metric offers valuable insights into an agent’s performance
and behavioral patterns. As illustrated in Figure G.2, the number of tool calls varies significantly
across environments. An inverse relationship is observed between the frequency of tool use and
both overall performance and the level of required domain expertise. Specifically, the Spectra and
MD environments exhibit the highest volume of tool calls. In contrast, the number of tool calls is
considerably lower and comparable between the OpenCatalyst and ML environments. Furthermore,
the tool-calling agent consistently employs a greater number of tool calls than its ReAct counterpart.
This discrepancy is anticipated, as the tool-calling agent’s strategy depends more heavily on tool
sampling and less on explicit reasoning chains.
Figure G.2: Total tool calls per environment, sorted by required domain expertise. Environments
demanding less expertise (OpenCatalyst, ML) exhibit fewer tool calls, while those requiring more
(Spectra, MD) prompt significantly higher usage. The tool-calling agent consistently employs more
calls than the ReAct agent across all environments.
G.1
Performance and Number of Tools
The observed trend suggests a potential inverse relationship between the number of tool calls and
pass@5 scores, a comparison visually supported by Figure G.3. This figure indicates that high
performance on the OpenCatalyst and ML environments is associated with a low number of tool
calls. Conversely, lower scores on the MD and, more markedly, on the Spectra environments coincide
with a substantially higher frequency of tool calls. One might hypothesize that this trend is driven by
an inherent requirement for more steps or a greater number of available tools in certain environments.
However, this explanation is not supported by the data. The number of steps required for Spectra,
MD, and OpenCatalyst is comparable, particularly as both MD and OpenCatalyst involve numerous
file management operations absent in Spectra. Similarly, the possibility that a larger toolkit acts as
a distractor is countered by the fact that the number of tools available in Spectra is comparable to
that in ML, as detailed in Table 1.
50
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Total Tool Calls
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
pass@5 Score
ML
ML
ML
MLOpenCatalyst
OpenCatalyst
OpenCatalyst
OpenCatalyst
MD
MD
MD
MD
Spectra
Spectra
Spectra
Spectra
Claude 3.5 Sonnet
GPT-4o
React Agent
Tool-Calling Agent
Figure G.3: Illustration of the inverse trend between pass@5 scores and tool call frequency.
The high scores in OpenCatalyst and ML correspond to low tool usage, while the low scores
in MD and Spectra correspond to high, inefficient tool usage. This divergence occurs despite
comparable procedural steps and toolset sizes, countering hypotheses that attribute performance
solely to environmental complexity.
51
H
Number of Completion Tokens
Although the number of tool calls demonstrates a strong correlation with model performance, the
consumption of completion tokens does not exhibit a similar trend, as illustrated in Figure H.4.
The count of completion tokens remains largely consistent across the majority of environments and
agents. A prominent exception is the MD environment, where the ReAct agent implemented with
Claude-3.5 Sonnet generates a substantially higher volume of tokens. Apart from this outlier, the
ML environment is the only one that consistently results in a lower token count relative to the others.
Regarding agent performance, it is noteworthy that the ReAct agent does not systematically produce
more tokens despite its requirement to articulate its reasoning through explicit “thoughts”.
Figure H.4: Number of completion tokens across environments sorted by the domain expertise
required to solve them. The figure illustrates that the number of tokens is similar across environments
and agents. Only the ML environment seems to yield a lower number of completion tokens.
52
I
Tool verbosity ablation results
Based on the initial results obtained across the environments, we investigated whether the verbosity
level employed in the tool descriptions provided to the agent could significantly influence agent
performance. As shown in Table I.11, no clear trend was observed across the different verbosity levels,
with the performance trends across environments remaining largely consistent. The most notable
performance difference occurred in the MD environment at the COMPREHENSIVE verbosity level when
compared to the other two description levels. This difference, however, was less pronounced for the
chained tasks.
Table I.11: Ablation Study on Tool Description Verbosity. This table presents the results of varying
the level of detail in tool descriptions provided to the agents (brief, workflow, and comprehensive).
The text in bold shows the best scores across environments. In the simpler OpenCatalyst and
ML environments, performance is consistently high regardless of verbosity. However, in the more
complex MD and Spectra domains, providing more context through workflow or comprehensive
descriptions generally improves scores, indicating that richer information about the action space is
crucial for the agent’s policy to succeed in challenging tasks.
Agent
Verbosity
MD
ML
OpenCatalyst
Spectra
single
chained
single
chained
single
chained
single
chained
Claude 3.5 Sonnet
ReAct
brief
0.22
0.5
0.89
0.96
1.0
1.0
0.19
0.47
workflow
0.21
0.51
0.56
0.91
1.0
1.0
0.18
0.43
comprehensive
0.57
0.69
0.97
0.97
1.0
1.0
0.24
0.44
Tool-Calling
brief
0.52
0.78
0.99
0.91
1.0
0.66
0.05
0.49
workflow
0.81
0.74
1.0
0.99
1.0
1.0
0.1
0.46
comprehensive
0.69
0.65
0.89
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.17
0.3
GPT-4o
ReAct
brief
0.2
0.72
0.33
0.99
0.89
1.0
0.05
0.44
workflow
0.51
0.71
0.89
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.38
comprehensive
0.42
0.72
0.97
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.36
Tool-Calling
brief
0.2
0.69
0.33
0.77
1.0
0.75
0.05
0.41
workflow
0.07
0.77
1.0
0.97
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.39
comprehensive
0.19
0.73
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.41
J
Embeddings distance ablation
For studying the consistently poor performance of agents in the Spectra environment, we decided
to analyze the cosine distance of tasks and tools from that environment. We used the embeddings
obtained through the API of the closed-source model text-embedding-3-large.
For obtaining the distances reported in Table 1, each task and tool description is passed through the
model to generate its respective embedding. These embeddings are then used to calculate pairwise
distances between tools, tasks, and the combinations of tools and tasks. The distance metric used for
comparison is the cosine distance, which is calculated as follows:
Dcosine(A, B) = 1 −
A · B
∥A∥2∥B∥2
where:
• A and B are the vectors (embeddings) representing the two entities (tasks or tools),
• ∥A∥2 and ∥B∥2 are the L2 norms (magnitudes) of the vectors,
• A · B is the dot product between the vectors.
53
K
Overall Results
Table K.12: Performance comparison of agents across Spectra, ML and OpenCatalyst tasks with
varying tool verbosity.
Task/
Env
Task
Level
Tool
Verbosity
Agent
Model
Scores
Tool Exec
time (s)
Total
tokens
Tool calls
Overall
pass@5
pass^5
Total
Failed
Spectra
Task
brief
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.050
0.050
0.050
2517.794
1999844
316
0
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.020
0.046
0.001
4954.448
1066725
644
0
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.140
0.192
0.101
2761.069
1075978
487
0
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.020
0.046
0.001
4669.816
2982094
855
0
comprehensive
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.120
0.167
0.100
3321.458
9600785
681
0
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0
0.000
0.000
3986.564
7067824
1350
0
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.150
0.238
0.068
4672.958
11309758
890
0
ReAct
GPT-4o
0
0.000
0.000
3372.496
8579030
575
0
workflow
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.100
0.100
0.100
2909.819
6487221
680
0
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0
0.000
0.000
5425.582
4845761
1284
0
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.140
0.183
0.104
3491.533
7418732
841
0
ReAct
GPT-4o
0
0.000
0.000
3555.800
5418950
632
1
Subtask
brief
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.447
0.492
0.407
14603.170
3052471
1591
0
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.343
0.415
0.286
25426.708
3711126
1797
0
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.416
0.467
0.372
12952.609
1845878
1221
0
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.366
0.436
0.303
13407.503
2414056
1510
0
comprehensive
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.281
0.304
0.257
2512.472
7929146
1753
20
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.344
0.407
0.294
13817.494
7819026
1857
0
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.410
0.436
0.377
11667.673
7265056
1480
48
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.332
0.365
0.290
6221.911
6186909
1329
10
workflow
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.417
0.460
0.370
2625.681
7404750
1740
16
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.333
0.388
0.299
14822.657
5269491
1658
0
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.388
0.429
0.351
11366.324
5174901
1406
90
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.331
0.384
0.276
12005.337
7266929
1282
38
ML
Task
brief
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.667
0.993
0.161
1220.296
1845649
147
9
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.267
0.333
0.109
1266.829
1340868
137
6
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.533
0.887
0.135
1034.641
933964
116
14
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.267
0.333
0.109
3337.430
4463267
128
2
comprehensive
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.600
0.887
0.359
1859.059
5304033
159
7
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.733
0.996
0.244
1176.306
1968853
95
0
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.733
0.974
0.446
1093.865
2211623
96
13
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.533
0.967
0.055
1097.562
1848462
86
0
workflow
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
1
1.000
1.000
1425.824
2997344
132
0
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.933
1.000
0.776
1189.020
1600247
103
0
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.400
0.557
0.333
1048.410
1731643
99
14
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.733
0.891
0.667
823.038
1375619
94
4
Subtask
brief
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.783
0.909
0.589
1024.336
1444605.667
94.333
8.333
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.417
0.772
0.072
2919.916
1283053.667
126.667
12.000
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.767
0.959
0.563
628.312
352240.333
76.667
6.333
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.950
0.994
0.918
572.154
218174.667
49.667
0.000
comprehensive
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.950
1.000
0.832
602.452
697221.667
65.333
0.000
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.950
0.999
0.867
455.008
511905.000
56.000
0.000
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.833
0.966
0.666
604.539
525621.000
62.333
7.000
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.917
0.999
0.755
687.699
408186.333
49.333
1.667
workflow
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.933
0.993
0.861
741.300
730223.000
65.000
0.000
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.883
0.966
0.834
414.070
364710.333
54.667
0.000
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.833
0.915
0.707
670.169
473178.000
68.333
8.000
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.967
0.999
0.923
611.969
321803.333
48.333
2.333
OpenCatalyst
Task
brief
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.933
1.000
0.776
2037.189
2711823
188
32
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
1
1.000
1.000
2130.001
1953905
144
24
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.733
0.891
0.667
2290.416
1538987
114
2
ReAct
GPT-4o
1
1.000
1.000
1702.736
1786819
125
0
comprehensive
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.933
1.000
0.776
1763.970
3269313
157
37
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
1
1.000
1.000
2054.796
2314210
120
0
ReAct
Claude 3.5
1
1.000
1.000
1705.277
2586206
119
0
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.933
1.000
0.776
2642.857
2563808
119
0
workflow
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
1
1.000
1.000
1744.650
2646049
154
26
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
1
1.000
1.000
2102.629
2357448
153
30
ReAct
Claude 3.5
1
1.000
1.000
1762.177
2332113
125
0
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.933
1.000
0.776
2347.130
2064826
160
0
Subtask
brief
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.552
0.655
0.449
1292.663
793577
111
23
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.714
0.746
0.682
1206.510
851828
140
39
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.971
0.999
0.924
810.621
455240
113
10
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.943
0.996
0.877
1254.770
574773
103
8
comprehensive
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
1.000
1.000
1.000
1350.958
981333
126
10
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
1.000
1.000
1.000
1146.016
692674
109
4
ReAct
Claude 3.5
1.000
1.000
1.000
1109.015
806821
116
1
ReAct
GPT-4o
1.000
1.000
1.000
1203.005
627433
107
0
workflow
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.895
0.999
0.668
1371.961
888996
121
11
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
1.000
1.000
1.000
1135.358
617183
109
4
ReAct
Claude 3.5
1.000
1.000
1.000
1086.880
699299
115
0
ReAct
GPT-4o
1.000
1.000
1.000
1066.127
545052
98
1
54
Table K.13: Performance comparison of agents across MD tasks with varying tool verbosity
Task/
Env
Task
Level
Tool
Verbosity
Agent
Model
Scores
Tool Exec
time (s)
Total
tokens
Tool calls
Overall
pass@5
pass^5
Total
Failed
Surface Energy
Task
brief
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.20
0.57
0.00272
3994.60
2372658
243
46
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.00
0.00
0.00
2668.31
2761722
334
53
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.40
0.65
0.25
1150.81
740500
132
10
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.00
0.00
0.00
1937.86
1711175
348
92
comprehensive
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.30
0.42
0.25
3436.00
4010181
284
52
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.10
0.23
0.0025
2576.81
2756626
376
55
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.60
0.75
0.35
2633.79
2173989
204
0
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.15
0.25
0.02
1872.54
2686373
254
46
workflow
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.65
0.75
0.41
3143.25
1669994
234
3
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.00
0.00
0.00
2579.06
2608477
346
67
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.00
0.00
0.00
2796.24
1455136
91
4
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.10
0.34
0.0001
1732.40
2116582
309
69
Subtask
brief
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.86
0.95
0.70
3675.40
2392176
412
21
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.53
0.66
0.42
16050.29
8819312
817
114
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.33
0.48
0.21
2707.52
2015689
320
33
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.55
0.66
0.47
4862.63
3533316
697
131
comprehensive
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.86
0.95
0.69
3174.83
2310994
327
7
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.56
0.71
0.42
16846.90
7371726
871
155
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.61
0.72
0.50
3100.14
2213461
353
26
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.54
0.70
0.40
5057.13
5066130
702
143
workflow
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.78
0.94
0.54
3439.93
2623439
394
22
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.55
0.73
0.45
7761.7
7628950
883
154
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.60
0.68
0.52
3228.89
2045466
367
27
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.56
0.68
0.46
4750.14
4227465
682
121
Melting
Task
brief
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.13
0.45
0.0002
2012.93
1843125
138
44
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.00
0.00
0.00
2015.09
1525141
241
57
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
265.25
35472
0
0
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.00
0.00
0.00
4501.84
2364025
208
35
comprehensive
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.33
0.64
0.03
1975.85
2215060
170
34
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.20
0.33
0.026
1171.90
1532063
184
7
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.67
0.97
0.36
2479.20
1956353
191
24
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.00
0.00
0.00
1522.47
1554510
131
8
workflow
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.33
0.78
0.03
1962.91
1398117
139
13
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.00
0.00
0.00
1132.12
902589
169
8
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.47
0.64
0.34
1387.85
622430
80
2
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.07
0.22
0.0001
971.58
765381
132
2
Subtask
brief
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.55
0.67
0.44
3243.99
3243724
364
69
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.63
0.78
0.45
21719.57
19734289
583
21
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.41
0.64
0.22
3795.09
2994944
380
62
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.53
0.68
0.41
3598.93
2343615
337
3
comprehensive
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.51
0.57
0.47
3160.90
4366885
348
84
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.57
0.80
0.41
27788.65
7650030
561
44
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.80
0.95
0.69
5811.09
5376726
495
76
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.53
0.64
0.42
3352.13
3057493
313
3
workflow
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.52
0.74
0.35
3077.21
3278175
348
58
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.64
0.83
0.44
29058.55
4814488
467
18
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.48
0.61
0.40
4047.19
2874521
405
64
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.60
0.69
0.51
3486.44
1861511
315
1
Quenching
Task
brief
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.40
0.56
0.33
2715.42
4212990
204
58
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.27
0.61
0.007
1633.41
2357544
195
27
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
3276.82
650701
30.0
0.0
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.27
0.61
0.007
3045.26
5253679
198
50
comprehensive
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.87
0.99
0.55
1575.07
1252706
124
5
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.00
0.00
0.00
1237.00
2489890
157
6
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.00
0.00
0.00
3123.35
1933814
47
0
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.80
0.99
0.33
1188.14
1236142
104
1
workflow
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.67
0.89
0.44
1606.94
900033
120
3
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.07
0.22
0.0001
1099.34
1549820
150
7
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.00
0.00
0.00
3081.22
1279999
47
0
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.53
0.97
0.06
1817.45
1329878
95
2
Subtask
brief
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.50
0.71
0.28
4098.50
4427260
362
79
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.38
0.63
0.25
12957.03
15868903
629
40
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.28
0.36
0.25
3893.25
6921097
349
62
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.52
0.82
0.27
3220.80
1996441
334
6
comprehensive
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.30
0.42
0.25
4638.77
6404970
342
81
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.48
0.69
0.29
10539.12
9541567
566
27
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.30
0.42
0.25
6541.34
6996892
511
111
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.53
0.84
0.29
3328.19
2892921
334
9
workflow
Tool-calling
Claude 3.5
0.35
0.54
0.20
682.25
4714626
361
85
Tool-calling
GPT-4o
0.48
0.74
0.28
13034.44
10529810
580
12
ReAct
Claude 3.5
0.25
0.25
0.25
670.01
8800
97
7
ReAct
GPT-4o
0.45
0.0.77
0.26
4450.11
5727793
455
102
55
References
[1]
Shunyu Yao et al. τ-bench: A Benchmark for Tool-Agent-User Interaction in Real-World
Domains. 2024. arXiv: 2406.12045 [cs.AI]. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.
12045.
[2]
Daan Frenkel and Berend Smit. Understanding molecular simulation: from algorithms to
applications. Elsevier, 2023.
[3]
A. P. Thompson et al. “LAMMPS - a flexible simulation tool for particle-based materials
modeling at the atomic, meso, and continuum scales”. In: Comp. Phys. Comm. 271 (2022),
p. 108171. DOI: 10.1016/j.cpc.2021.108171.
[4]
Matthew K. Horton et al. “Accelerated data-driven materials science with the Materials Project”.
In: Nature Materials (July 2025). ISSN: 1476-4660. DOI: 10.1038/s41563-025-02272-0.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41563-025-02272-0.
[5]
Lowik Chanussot et al. “Open catalyst 2020 (OC20) dataset and community challenges”. In:
Acs Catalysis 11.10 (2021), pp. 6059–6072.
[6]
Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. “Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system”. In: Proceedings
of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining.
2016, pp. 785–794.
[7]
Kevin Maik Jablonka, Luc Patiny, and Berend Smit. “Making Molecules Vibrate: Interactive
Web Environment for the Teaching of Infrared Spectroscopy”. In: Journal of Chemical Educa-
tion 99.2 (Jan. 2022), pp. 561–569. ISSN: 1938-1328. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.1c01101.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.1c01101.
[8]
Damiano Banfi and Luc Patiny. “www.nmrdb.org: Resurrecting and Processing NMR Spectra
On-line”. In: CHIMIA 62.4 (Apr. 2008), p. 280. ISSN: 0009-4293. DOI: 10.2533/chimia.
2008.280. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.2533/chimia.2008.280.
[9]
Andrés M. Castillo, Luc Patiny, and Julien Wist. “Fast and accurate algorithm for the simulation
of NMR spectra of large spin systems”. In: Journal of Magnetic Resonance 209.2 (Apr.
2011), pp. 123–130. ISSN: 1090-7807. DOI: 10.1016/j.jmr.2010.12.008. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmr.2010.12.008.
[10]
João Aires-de-Sousa, Markus C. Hemmer, and Johann Gasteiger. “Prediction of 1H NMR
Chemical Shifts Using Neural Networks”. In: Analytical Chemistry 74.1 (Dec. 2001), pp. 80–
90. ISSN: 1520-6882. DOI: 10.1021/ac010737m. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/
ac010737m.
[11]
Inc. Modal Labs. Modal Python Package. Version 1.0. Accessed: 2025-08-21. 2025. URL:
https://modal.com/docs/guide.
[12]
Shyue Ping Ong et al. “Python Materials Genomics (pymatgen): A robust, open-source
python library for materials analysis”. In: Computational Materials Science 68 (Feb. 2013),
pp. 314–319. ISSN: 0927-0256. DOI: 10.1016/j.commatsci.2012.10.028. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.commatsci.2012.10.028.
56