Accelerated Inorganic Materials Design
with Generative AI Agents
Izumi Takahara
The University of Tokyo
kougen@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Teruyasu Mizoguchi
The University of Tokyo
teru@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Bang Liu
University of Montreal & Mila
bang.liu@umontreal.ca
Abstract
Designing inorganic crystalline materials with tailored properties is critical to
technological innovation, yet current generative computational methods often strug-
gle to efficiently explore desired targets with sufficient interpretability. Here, we
present MatAgent, a generative approach for inorganic materials discovery that
harnesses the powerful reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs).
By combining a diffusion-based generative model for crystal structure estimation
with a predictive model for property evaluation, MatAgent uses iterative, feedback-
driven guidance to steer material exploration precisely toward user-defined targets.
Integrated with external cognitive tools—including short-term memory, long-term
memory, the periodic table, and a comprehensive knowledge base—MatAgent
emulates human expert reasoning to vastly expand the accessible compositional
space. Our results demonstrate that MatAgent robustly directs exploration toward
desired properties while consistently achieving high compositional validity, unique-
ness, and material novelty. This framework thus provides a highly interpretable,
practical, and versatile AI-driven solution to accelerate the discovery and design of
next-generation inorganic materials.
1
Introduction
Developing materials with desired properties is a critical challenge, driving innovations across essen-
tial industrial fields such as catalysis, energy storage, and beyond[1–3]. Computational approaches,
including density functional theory[4, 5] simulations and high-throughput virtual screenings, have
been widely employed to identify candidate materials[6]. However, these traditional methods typi-
cally require extensive manual modeling by human experts or exhaustive enumeration of candidate
materials, limiting their efficiency and scalability in exploring broader materials spaces. To overcome
these limitations and facilitate more autonomous, scalable, and efficient materials discovery, there
is an increasing demand for workflows capable of effectively exploring broader materials space to
identify novel inorganic materials while reducing the reliance on human-expert intervention.
Recently, generative artificial intelligence has made significant progress, particularly in the fields of
natural language processing and computer vision. These advances have also influenced computa-
tional materials design[7], where generative models such as variational autoencoders[8], generative
adversarial networks[9], generative flow networks[10], diffusion models[11–13], and autoregressive
models[14] are increasingly being applied, individually[15–26] or in combination[27–30], to gener-
ate and explore novel crystalline materials. This opens new avenues for effectively navigating and
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) Workshop: AI4Mat: AI for
Accelerated Materials Design.
exploring the vast materials design space utilizing generative artificial intelligence techniques[31, 32].
For example, MatterGen[26], a diffusion-based generative model, has successfully generated crystal
structures by simultaneously generating lattice vectors, atomic coordinates, and elemental species,
enabling the exploration and discovery of novel materials beyond conventional approaches. Similarly,
large language models (LLMs), fine-tuned by Gruver et al.[19] or trained from scratch by Antunes et
al.[20], have directly generated stable materials, highlighting the broad potential of generative AI
approaches in accelerating materials discovery.
However, these generative approaches typically produce materials through a single-step generation
process, potentially limiting their ability to precisely meet specified target properties. Furthermore,
in many target-aware generation methods, materials are optimized within latent spaces, making it
challenging to interpret the underlying reasoning behind the generated results. Recent advances
in the foundational knowledge and reasoning capabilities of LLMs have enabled these models to
perform complex and sophisticated tasks[33–35]. Leveraging these enhanced capabilities, multi-
step refinement approaches have emerged as a promising direction. For instance, MatExpert[36]
decomposed the material generation process into three distinct steps and demonstrated improved
performance in generating target-oriented materials. Jia et al. proposed an LLM-driven iterative
framework that refines materials via modifications, accompanied by human-interpretable reasoning
provided in natural language[37]. Nevertheless, existing LLM-based methods primarily rely on the
inherent knowledge embedded within the LLMs, thereby constraining their exploration to relatively
limited compositional spaces or frequently requiring fine-tuning tailored specifically to each target-
specific property or constraint, thus reducing their practical scalability. To achieve more effective
materials discovery, it is essential to develop scalable frameworks capable of autonomously exploring
broader materials spaces, while incorporating external knowledge and enabling interpretable, iterative
refinement toward target properties.
In this study, we introduce MatAgent, a framework using a general-purpose LLM as its central genera-
tive engine for materials discovery. Enhanced with external tools that mimic human-expert reasoning
processes and integrated with models for crystal structure estimation and property evaluation, MatA-
gent enables feedback-driven autonomous exploration of broad materials space. Our experiments
targeting specific formation energies demonstrate MatAgent’s effectiveness in proposing materials
with desired properties while maintaining high compositional validity, uniqueness, and novelty. The
framework’s natural language integration enables intuitive constraint implementation for practical
workflows. By providing explicit reasoning for each composition proposal, our framework ensures
interpretability in materials design process, serving as an intelligent collaborator that enhances expert
knowledge and accelerates inorganic materials discovery.
2
Results
2.1
MatAgent framework
An overview of the proposed MatAgent framework is shown in Fig. 1. MatAgent is a feedback-driven
iterative framework that involves four distinct stages: (1) LLM-driven Planning stage, (2) LLM-
driven Proposition stage, (3) generation of three-dimensional crystal structures in Crystal Structure
Estimation stage, and (4) evaluation of materials properties and the generation of feedback in the
Property Evaluation stage.
LLM as agent and tool-use inspired by human-experts. Recent advancements in LLMs have driven
remarkable improvements in their reasoning capabilities, enabling their use in complex problem-
solving tasks[38–40]. Our framework leverages these capabilities for materials design through a
two-stage process: (1) Planning and (2) Proposition, as shown in Fig. 1.
During the Planning stage, the LLM strategically selects one of four tools with explicit justification
based on current situation. While previous methods have relied on reasoning using knowledge
inherent to LLMs and its self-reflection[37], our approach aims to enhance materials exploration
by LLMs and enable effective AI-driven materials design through the multifaceted integration of
tools that mimic the reasoning processes of human experts. Specifically, we integrated four distinct
tools—short-term memory, long-term memory, the periodic table, and the knowledge base—reflecting
the human approach of leveraging short-term experience, long-term insights, fundamental knowledge
such as the periodic table, and previously accumulated knowledge to facilitate iterative exploration
and informed decision-making in materials-design.
2
The short-term memory recalls the compositions proposed in recent iterations and the corresponding
feedback received. The intent of this is to help the LLM understand recent performance trends
and revise potentially redundant composition proposals. The long-term memory retrieves not only
previously successful compositions but also the associated reasoning processes used by the LLM,
thus providing insights into why certain compositions led to favorable outcomes. The periodic table
provides elements related to those used in the previous composition, specifically elements within the
same group, based on the expectation that such substitutions can fine-tune material properties while
preserving compositional plausibility. Lastly, the knowledge base is a compiled database that records
how material properties change when transitioning from one composition to another.
In the Proposition stage, relevant information is retrieved based on the tool selected during the
Planning stage. Combining this retrieved information with the composition proposed in the previous
iteration and the corresponding feedback, the LLM then generates a new composition proposal
accompanied by explicit reasoning, providing interpretable insights into the underlying design choices.
By strategically utilizing these tools, the framework moves beyond the intrinsic knowledge of the
LLM, enhancing its reasoning capabilities and broadening exploration within the materials design
space. The complete prompt templates used for the Planning and Proposition stage corresponding to
each tool are shown in Appendix A.
Figure 1: The overview of the proposed materials design framework. MatAgent is a feedback-
driven iterative framework that involves four distinct stages: (1) LLM-driven Planning: where the
LLM analyzes current situation and selects an appropriate tool with explicit reasoning; (2) LLM-
driven Proposition: where the LLM proposes new material compositions with explicit reasoning
based on retrieved information and previous feedback; (3) Crystal Structure Estimation: where a
diffusion model transforms proposed compositions into three-dimensional crystal structures; and (4)
Property Evaluation: where a GNN-based model evaluates physical properties and generates feedback
for further refinement. During the Planning stage, the LLM selects the appropriate tools (short-term
memory, long-term memory, periodic table, and knowledge base), providing the natural-language
justifications. In the Proposition stage, the LLM proposes revised compositions by reasoning based
on previous feedback and insights obtained from these tools. The proposed compositions are then
processed in the Crystal Structure Estimation stage, where three-dimensional crystal structures are
generated from the proposed composition. These structures are evaluated and the corresponding
feedback is generated in the Property Evaluation stage, and the feedback is iteratively provided to the
LLM for further refinement.
3
Crystal Structure Estimation. Although the LLM proposes candidate materials as discrete com-
positions, accurately evaluating the corresponding material properties typically requires knowledge
of three-dimensional crystal structures, including unit cell geometries and atomic coordinates. To
address this requirement, Crystal Structure Estimation stage plays a crucial role in the proposed
framework by estimating three-dimensional crystal structures corresponding to the compositions
proposed by the LLM.
In this study, we employed a diffusion model[12, 13, 41] to estimate crystal structures from the
proposed composition. Diffusion models have successfully been applied to generative tasks within
image and language generation fields, and their effectiveness has also been demonstrated in crystal
structure generation[26, 41, 18]. We constructed the MP-60 dataset by collecting stable crystal
structure data with unit cells containing up to 60 atoms from the Materials Project[42] database.
Using this dataset, we trained a conditional crystal structure generation model, which generates
multiple candidate structures for each given reduced composition with varying numbers of formula
units per unit cell (Z). This approach is based on the idea that simultaneously generating and
evaluating structures with different formula units for the same composition helps identify the most
stable unit cell configuration. The structure estimator is not limited to diffusion models but can also
utilize other crystal structure prediction methods, enabling it to directly leverage advancements in
both generative models and crystal structure prediction technologies.
Property Evaluation. The Property Evaluation stage plays a key role by quantitatively assessing
and providing feedback on the material compositions proposed by the LLM. Specifically, it evaluates
the physical properties of three-dimensional crystal structures generated in the Crystal Structure
Estimation stage. In this study, we constructed a property predictor based on graph neural networks
(GNNs), trained on the MP-60 dataset, specifically for predicting the formation energy per atom. The
formation energy of all candidate structures is evaluated, and the structure with the lowest formation
energy per atom is considered the most stable and selected. Feedback derived from the formation
energy predictions is subsequently returned to the LLM, enabling further refinement and improvement
of the proposed compositions. A template for generating the feedback is provided in Appendix A.3.
Figure 2: Comparison of tool usage patterns during the Planning stage by the LLM. a Tool
selection frequency with which each tool (short-term memory, long-term memory, periodic table,
and knowledge base) was selected by the LLM for each target value in the Planning stage to guide
subsequent material composition proposals. b Tool selection frequency evolved over iterations,
categorized into Early (iteration 1–5), Mid (iteration 6–10), and Late (iterations 11-15) stages.
4
2.2
Iterative materials generation guided by target property
Our framework iteratively refines materials through feedback cycles toward specific target properties.
We selected formation energy per atom as the target property, defining target values based on
quantiles from the MP-60 dataset: −3.8 eV/atom (1.0% quantile), −3.5 eV/atom (2.5% quantile),
−3.0 eV/atom (10% quantile), −2.5 eV/atom (20% quantile), and −1.6 eV/atom (40% quantile).
The distribution of formation energy per atom for the MP-60 dataset is provided in Appendix B. We
employed OpenAI’s GPT-4o and o3-mini as LLM backbones, conducting 20 independent runs of 15
iterations each, starting from randomly sampled compositions. GPT-4o is a general-purpose LLM
developed by OpenAI, applicable to various types of tasks, while o3-mini is a specialized model
optimized for focused reasoning applications with strength in scientific contexts.
Tool selection Patterns. We first analyzed how each LLM selected tools during the Planning stage.
Fig. 2 summarizes tool selection frequency, with Fig. 2 a showing the tool selection frequency for
each target value and Fig. 2 b illustrating the time evolution of tool selection. From Fig. 2 a, GPT-4o
and o3-mini showed distinct patterns depending on target formation energy. GPT-4o frequently
selected the knowledge base and long-term memory when targeting lower formation energy values
(e.g., −3.8 eV/atom), whereas at higher values (e.g., −1.6 eV/atom), it preferred using the periodic
table alongside the knowledge base. In contrast, o3-mini heavily relied on the knowledge base when
targeting −3.8 eV/atom but exhibited more uniform tool selection for −1.6 eV/atom.
Examining tool-selection evolution over iterations, GPT-4o initially showed a strong preference for
the knowledge base during early stages (iterations 1–5), but gradually reduced its reliance in later
stages (iterations 11–15), increasingly utilizing long-term memory to leverage previous experiences.
o3-mini similarly shifted toward increased use of long-term memory in later stages, accompanied
by greater reliance on short-term memory. This suggests that both GPT-4o and o3-mini exhibit
contextually adaptive behavior in their tool selection strategies, dynamically modifying their choices
in response to the evolving task requirements and previously observed outcomes.
Evaluation of generated materials—success rate comparison. To explore the capability of the
proposed framework in proposing materials, success rates were calculated based on these proposals
as shown in Fig. 3, where a "successful" run is defined as achieving at least one composition with a
predicted property value within ±0.25 eV/atom of the target. We conducted comparative experiments
without tool assistance (GPT-4o w/o tools and o3-mini w/o tools) and also included results from
MatterGen, a diffusion-based generative model fine-tuned on the MP-20 dataset using classifier-free
(CF) guidance[43] for guided generation. For consistent evaluation, both MatAgent and MatterGen
used the same property predictor without post-processing steps like structural relaxation. It should be
noted that while MatterGen generates materials in a single step, MatAgent’s iterative approach incurs
increasing computational costs as iterations progress. All MatAgent experiments were initialized
with compositions randomly sampled from the MP-20 dataset.
From Fig. 3, success rates were initially low for the first proposed compositions but steadily increased
with iterations, demonstrating the effectiveness of our iterative refinement approach in navigating
materials generation towards target property. MatterGen typically achieved higher success rates at
early iterations compared to both LLMs, indicating effectiveness in rapidly generating materials close
to target formation energies. GPT-4o w/ tools achieved higher success rates compared to GPT-4o w/o
tools, especially when targeting formation energies of −3.8 eV/atom and −2.5 eV/atom. However,
for the most challenging target (−3.8 eV/atom), both GPT-4o configurations exhibited relatively
low success rates. Even for such a case, the success rate can be further enhanced by integrating
knowledge-informed initialization, as detailed in Appendix C. The analysis from Fig. 3 revealed
that o3-mini consistently demonstrated remarkably high success rates approaching 1.0, even when
targeting the most challenging formation energy value of −3.8 eV/atom.
Evaluation of generated materials—compositional metrics. Although the high success rates
achieved by GPT-4o and o3-mini indicate their capability to generate material compositions close
to target properties, these success rates alone may not fully reflect the practical usefulness of the
framework in materials exploration. In practice, compositions that are chemically invalid or already
well-known typically have limited usefulness. Therefore, the compositional validity, uniqueness,
novelty, and overall V.U.N. score of the generated materials compositions when targeting −3.8
eV/atom were evaluated (Fig. 4 a). Here, validity refers to the proportion of compositions assessed
valid according to SMACT[44]; uniqueness denotes the proportion of unique compositions among
candidate compositions; novelty indicates the proportion of compositions not present in the MP-20
5
Figure 3: Performance evaluation of the proposed framework on the task of targeted materials
design. Success rate progression over iterations for different settings of the MatAgent framework
using GPT-4o and o3-mini as LLM backbones. Results are shown under conditions with and without
tool-assisted Planning and Proposition, referred to as GPT-4o w/ tools, GPT-4o w/o tools, o3-mini w/
tools, and o3-mini w/o tools, respectively. Reference success rates from MatterGen[26] fine-tuned on
formation energy per atom using the MP-20 dataset are also included.
training set; and the V.U.N. score represents the proportion of compositions that are simultaneously
valid, unique, and novel. Here, while MatterGen was fine-tuned on the MP-20 dataset, the LLMs in
MatAgent were not exclusively trained on this dataset and their broader pretraining may influence the
novelty evaluation, thus a direct comparison of novelty scores between MatAgent and MatterGen may
not be entirely fair. For MatAgent, all metrics were evaluated based on the structures identified as
closest to the target property value within each independent run, while all 256 compositions generated
through CF-guided generation were included in the assessment for MatterGen.
Clear differences emerged between w/ tools and w/o tools scenarios. With GPT-4o, despite high
compositional validity without tools, uniqueness and novelty scores remained low. Adding tool-
assisted Planning and Proposition significantly enhanced these metrics, raising the V.U.N. score
from 0.20 to 0.60. Similarly, o3-mini w/o tools maintained high compositional validity but showed
zero novelty, resulting in a V.U.N. score of 0.0. In contrast, o3-mini w/ tools significantly boosted
uniqueness and novelty, achieving a V.U.N. score of 0.55, comparable to MatterGen.
To quantitatively evaluate the tendency of generated compositions, the elemental distributions in
the proposed compositions were analyzed, as presented in Fig. 4 b. Elemental distribution analysis
revealed that incorporating tool-assisted Planning and Proposition significantly expanded compo-
sitional space diversity. GPT-4o w/o tools primarily proposed materials dominated by Ti and O,
while with tools, it produced more diverse compositions involving F, Ca, and Al. Similarly, o3-mini
w/o tools suggested compositions with limited elements like Hf and O, where approximately 60%
of suggested compositions were HfO2, indicating heavy reliance on prior knowledge rather than
effective exploration. In contrast, with tool-assisted Planning and Proposition, it introduced a broader
range of elements including F, Th, and Y, enhancing compositional diversity and novelty.
Without tool assistance, LLMs frequently proposed well-known compositions, achieving high success
rates but limited novelty. Incorporating tool assistance significantly improved uniqueness and novelty
while maintaining high success rates, highlighting the advantages of integrating external tools into
LLM-driven reasoning. The contribution of each tool was further analyzed in Appendix E.
Interpretability in materials design processes. In previous sections, we have demonstrated that
the proposed MatAgent exhibits high success rates in proposing materials that meet target property
values, while also showing the capability to navigate diverse compositional spaces. In addition to
these strengths, a key advantage of our approach compared to many previous generative methods
6
Figure 4: Compositional metrics on proposed compositions. a Comparison of compositional valid-
ity, uniqueness, novelty, and the combined V.U.N. score across five different generation approaches.
b Pie charts showing elemental proportions of compositions closest to the target, sorted by frequency
for each approach. Elements comprising less than 2.5% are grouped together in the gray region
for GPT-4o w/o tools, GPT-4o w/toos, o3-mini w/o tools, and o3-mini w/ tools, respectively. The
complete distribution including all elements is available in Appendix D.
is the incorporation of LLM-driven reasoning processes into the materials design process, enabling
interpretation through natural language.
In the Planning stage, the LLM strategically selects tools with accompanying reasoning based on
the current situation. For example, o3-mini most frequently selected the knowledge base, providing
justifications such as: "Leveraging an external database can provide broader insight and more
data points on compounds with low formation energies, guiding us towards better substitutions."
Additionally, reasoning such as "Continuing with the external database appears most promising
as it provided the largest improvement, suggesting further fine-tuning may reach −3.8 eV/atom."
demonstrates adaptive behavior in response to previous outcomes. These explanations reveal how the
LLM dynamically adjusts it strategy based on the performance, enabling the interpretation of the
decision-making process by the LLM.
During the Proposition stage, composition proposals are made with accompanying reasoning. For
example, when targeting a formation energy of −3.8 eV/atom with o3-mini, if the previous attempt
resulted in a value lower than the target, the LLM might reason: "Replacing F with O in CeThO3F
to create CeThO4 should weaken the ionic bonds slightly, increasing the formation energy per atom
closer to the −3.8 eV/atom target". Conversely, when the previous attempt yielded a value higher
than the target, it might suggest: "Replacing Ba with Sr and Fe with Hf should achieve stronger ionic
bonds, as seen in Sr2HfO4, further lowering formation energy toward −3.8 eV/atom." These natural
language explanations make MatAgent’s decision-making transparent and interpretable. Importantly,
the reasoning it provides is often insightful even for domain experts, helping them uncover new
materials design principles. Therefore, MatAgent functions not merely as a generator of candidate
materials, but as an intelligent collaborator that enhances expert knowledge by expressing implicit
design logic in human-readable form. Examples of such reasoning in the Planning and Proposition
stages are provided in Appendix F.
2.3
Constrained generation with natural language: Application to industrial scenarios
While the proposed framework is promising for fundamental research, industrial applications of
materials design often require navigating practical constraints imposed by environmental regulations,
resource availability, and manufacturing requirements. Conventional generative approaches have
7
typically struggled with incorporating such qualitative constraints, being limited to numeric or
categorical conditions. MatAgent, however, leverages the natural language understanding capabilities
of LLMs to seamlessly integrate diverse constraints expressed in plain language. To evaluate this
industrial applicability, we examined the performance under several practical constraints:
1. Exclusion of environmentally damaging elements: Materials generation was performed
while explicitly excluding Pb, Hg, Cd, and Cr. The constraint was communicated via the
prompt: “Here, do not include Pb, Hg, Cd, Cr in any proposed compositions.”
2. Exclusion of actinide elements: Generation was carried out excluding actinide elements,
with the prompt: “Here, do not include the actinides in any proposed compositions.”
3. Restriction to non-metal elements: Generation was constrained to compositions containing
only non-metal elements, with the prompt: “Here, only propose compositions consisting of
non-metal elements.”
These constraints effectively altered elemental distributions in generated compositions. Constraint 1
completely eliminated targeted elements (96 % →100 % exclusion), Constraint 2 reduced actinide
presence (3% →1 %), and Constraint 3 dramatically increased non-metal-only compositions (0 % →
83 %). The target formation energy was set to −3.8 eV/atom for Constraints 1–2 and −2.5 eV/atom
for Constraint 3. The detailed elemental distributions corresponding to each constraint condition
are provided in Appendix G. By enabling natural language constraints, MatAgent bridges the gap
between theoretical AI frameworks and real-world industrial applications.
3
Discussion
In this work, we present MatAgent, an LLM-driven generative framework for inorganic materials
design, developed to iteratively propose and refine materials toward specific target properties. MatA-
gent leverages explicit, interpretable reasoning capabilities of the LLM to propose promising material
compositions. Inspired by the reasoning process of human experts, MatAgent integrates external
tools to extend beyond the inherent knowledge of the LLM and facilitate exploration across a broader
materials space. Compositions proposed by the LLM are subsequently evaluated by two complemen-
tary stages: the Crystal Structure Estimation stage employing a diffusion model, and the Property
Evaluation stage employing a GNN-based prediction model. These stages enable the provision of
precise feedback, guiding the LLM to iteratively refine and improve the generated compositions,
effectively steering the exploration toward materials with user-specified target properties.
Our framework demonstrated high effectiveness in guiding inorganic materials generation toward
specific target properties with controlled formation energies. Its key strength is interpretability through
natural language reasoning, making the design process transparent. While LLM-only compositions
showed limited diversity, integrating external tools that mimic expert reasoning significantly enhanced
exploration capabilities while maintaining validity. The transparent reasoning process not only
produces better material candidates but also accelerates human understanding by providing insights
into fundamental materials design principles and property-composition relationships. Our experiments
further demonstrated the framework’s ability to incorporate qualitative constraints in natural language,
addressing practical industrial requirements.
One limitation of the current study is that the proposed framework focuses exclusively on guiding
materials generation toward a single target property–formation energy. In practical materials discovery
tasks, it is often necessary to simultaneously optimize multiple materials properties, necessitating
more sophisticated property evaluators capable of accurately predicting diverse properties and more
complex feedback mechanisms. Therefore, future work should focus on extending the framework
to effectively guide the LLM toward practical multi-objective materials design. Additionally, the
current framework does not evaluate the correctness of reasoning provided by the LLM. Extending the
framework to incorporate a human-in-the-loop approach, wherein human experts provide feedback to
ensure accurate reasoning, would be important for developing a more effective framework.
A promising direction for future research is to integrate synthesizability considerations into the
MatAgent framework. By leveraging the text-based reasoning capabilities of LLMs, extensive
knowledge derived from textbooks, scientific literature, and other comprehensive sources can be
effectively incorporated. This integration would allow the LLM-based framework to autonomously
assess and reason about the practical synthesizability of proposed materials. Developing such a
8
framework that seamlessly combines extensive synthesis-related knowledge with efficient exploration
of materials spaces represents a significant advancement toward practical autonomous materials
discovery systems.
4
Methods
4.1
Tools
Short-term memory retrieval. In short-term memory retrieval, information regarding recent compo-
sition proposals, the reasoning behind these proposals, and their corresponding feedback are retrieved.
In this study, we retrieve information about the three most recent proposals.
Long-term memory retrieval. In long-term memory retrieval, information is retrieved regarding
past proposals that successfully generated compositions close to the target property, including the
reasoning behind these proposals. In this study, information about the top three such proposals is
retrieved.
Periodic table retrieval. In periodic table retrieval, elements belonging to the same group as each
element included in the previously proposed composition are retrieved and listed.
Knowledge base retrieval. In knowledge base retrieval, information is retrieved from a pre-
constructed knowledge base. To construct this knowledge base, 10,000 random composition pairs
were generated from the MP-20 dataset, and GPT-4o was used to analyze and explain why the
material properties change when one composition (source composition) transitions into another
(target composition). The prompt template used for generating the explanation is provided in sup-
plementary material A.5. The knowledge base consists of 10,000 data entries, each containing a
pair of compositions, their corresponding properties, and GPT-4o-generated explanations. During
retrieval, the previously proposed composition is first used as a query to identify the five most similar
source compositions from the knowledge base based on compositional similarity. The compositional
similarity is evaluated by vectorizing compositions using the CBFV[45] package. These five retrieved
candidate entries are then ranked by the LLM, and the top three entries judged by the LLM to be
most relevant and useful for the current task are ultimately selected.
4.2
Dataset
To curate the MP-60 dataset for training models used in Crystal Structure Estimation stage and
Property Evaluation stage, we collected crystal structure data from the Materials Project[42] database.
Structures were restricted to those containing up to 60 atoms per unit cell, with an energy above
hull of 0.02 eV/atom or less. Additionally, we excluded structures consisting exclusively of gaseous
elements and those with lattice vectors exceeding 20 Å. After applying these criteria, we obtained a
final dataset comprising 48,323 structures, which was subsequently divided into training, validation,
and test sets using a 6:2:2 ratio.
4.3
Crystal Structure Estimation
The Crystal Structure Estimation stage is responsible for generating three-dimensional crystal struc-
tures given a specific material composition proposed by LLMs. As the backbone model for this
component, we employ DiffCSP[41], a diffusion-based crystal structure prediction model, trained
on the MP-60 dataset to conditionally generate structures based on the provided compositions. For
each given reduced composition, we simultaneously generate five crystal structures for formula units
ranging from 1 to 4. Additionally, to ensure that the total number of atoms in each crystal structure
did not exceed 34, we adjusted the maximum formula units accordingly.
4.4
Property Evaluation
The Property Evaluation stage assesses the compositions and crystal structures proposed by the
LLM, providing feedback that guides subsequent composition proposals. Specifically, it employs
iComFormer[46], a GNN-based transformer model trained on formation energy per atom, as its
backbone for predicting material properties. All crystal structures generated in the Crystal Structure
Estimation stage are evaluated, and the structure with the lowest predicted formation energy per atom
9
is considered the most stable and selected accordingly. When the LLM submits a composition with
formatting problems, the system returns specific feedback that instructs the LLM to correct these
issues in its next attempts. Detailed descriptions of the feedback format are provided in supplementary
material A.3.
Code availability
The source code and the dataset used in this study are publicly available on GitHub
(https://github.com/izumitkhr/matagent).
Acknowledgement
This work was supported by JST ACT-X (Grant Number JPMJAX24DB) and JST BOOST (Grant
Number JPMJBS2418), Japan. I. T. was supported by the MERIT-WINGS, The University of Tokyo.
References
[1] Chi Chen, Yunxing Zuo, Weike Ye, Xiangguo Li, Zhi Deng, and Shyue Ping Ong. A critical
review of machine learning of energy materials. Advanced Energy Materials, 10(8):1903242,
2020.
[2] Takashi Toyao, Zen Maeno, Satoru Takakusagi, Takashi Kamachi, Ichigaku Takigawa, and Ken-
ichi Shimizu. Machine learning for catalysis informatics: Recent applications and prospects.
ACS Catalysis, 10(3):2260–2297, 2 2020.
[3] Amil Merchant, Simon Batzner, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Muratahan Aykol, Gowoon Cheon, and
Ekin Dogus Cubuk. Scaling deep learning for materials discovery. Nature, 624(7990):80–85,
12 2023.
[4] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn. Inhomogeneous electron gas. Phys. Rev., 136:B864–B871, Nov
1964.
[5] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham. Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation effects.
Phys. Rev., 140:A1133–A1138, 1965.
[6] Juhwan Noh, Geun Ho Gu, Sungwon Kim, and Yousung Jung. Machine-enabled inverse design
of inorganic solid materials: promises and challenges. Chem. Sci., 11:4871–4881, 2020.
[7] Hyunsoo Park, Zhenzhu Li, and Aron Walsh. Has generative artificial intelligence solved inverse
materials design? Matter, 7(7):2355–2367, 2024.
[8] Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
[9] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil
Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural
information processing systems, 2014.
[10] Emmanuel Bengio, Moksh Jain, Maksym Korablyov, Doina Precup, and Yoshua Bengio. Flow
network based generative models for non-iterative diverse candidate generation. In Advances in
neural information processing systems, 2021.
[11] Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A. Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep
unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2015.
[12] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
[13] Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P. Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon,
and Ben Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
10
[14] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2017.
[15] Zekun Ren, Siyu Isaac Parker Tian, Juhwan Noh, Felipe Oviedo, Guangzong Xing, Jiali Li,
Qiaohao Liang, Ruiming Zhu, Armin G. Aberle, Shijing Sun, Xiaonan Wang, Yi Liu, Qianxiao
Li, Senthilnath Jayavelu, Kedar Hippalgaonkar, Yousung Jung, and Tonio Buonassisi. An
invertible crystallographic representation for general inverse design of inorganic crystals with
targeted properties. Matter, 5(1):314–335, 1 2022.
[16] Sungwon Kim, Juhwan Noh, Geun Ho Gu, Alan Aspuru-Guzik, and Yousung Jung. Generative
adversarial networks for crystal structure prediction. ACS Central Science, 6(8):1412–1420, 8
2020.
[17] Mistal, Alex Hernández-García, Alexandra Volokhova, Alexandre AGM Duval, Yoshua Bengio,
Divya Sharma, Pierre Luc Carrier, Michał Koziarski, and Victor Schmidt. Crystal-gfn: sampling
materials with desirable properties and constraints. In AI for Accelerated Materials Design -
NeurIPS 2023 Workshop, 2023.
[18] Sherry Yang, KwangHwan Cho, Amil Merchant, Pieter Abbeel, Dale Schuurmans, Igor Mor-
datch, and Ekin Dogus Cubuk. Scalable diffusion for materials generation. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[19] Nate Gruver, Anuroop Sriram, Andrea Madotto, Andrew Gordon Wilson, C. Lawrence Zitnick,
and Zachary Ward Ulissi. Fine-tuned language models generate stable inorganic materials as
text. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[20] Luis M. Antunes, Keith T. Butler, and Ricardo Grau-Crespo. Crystal structure generation with
autoregressive large language modeling. Nature Communications, 15(1):10570, 12 2024.
[21] Benjamin Kurt Miller, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Anuroop Sriram, and Brandon M Wood. FlowMM:
Generating materials with riemannian flow matching. In Internatioinal conference on machine
learning, 2024.
[22] Junkil Park, Youhan Lee, and Jihan Kim. Multi-modal conditional diffusion model using signed
distance functions for metal-organic frameworks generation. Nature Communications, 16(1):34,
1 2025.
[23] Yong Zhao, Mohammed Al-Fahdi, Ming Hu, Edirisuriya M. D. Siriwardane, Yuqi Song, Alireza
Nasiri, and Jianjun Hu. High-throughput discovery of novel cubic crystal materials using deep
generative neural networks. Advanced Science, 8(20):2100566, 2021.
[24] Yong Zhao, Edirisuriya M. Dilanga Siriwardane, Zhenyao Wu, Nihang Fu, Mohammed Al-
Fahdi, Ming Hu, and Jianjun Hu. Physics guided deep learning for generative design of crystal
materials with symmetry constraints. npj Computational Materials, 9(1):38, 3 2023.
[25] Ruiming Zhu, Wei Nong, Shuya Yamazaki, and Kedar Hippalgaonkar. Wycryst: Wyckoff
inorganic crystal generator framework. Matter, 7(10):3469–3488, 10 2024.
[26] Claudio Zeni, Robert Pinsler, Daniel Zügner, Andrew Fowler, Matthew Horton, Xiang Fu,
Zilong Wang, Aliaksandra Shysheya, Jonathan Crabbé, Shoko Ueda, Roberto Sordillo, Lixin
Sun, Jake Smith, Bichlien Nguyen, Hannes Schulz, Sarah Lewis, Chin-Wei Huang, Ziheng Lu,
Yichi Zhou, Han Yang, Hongxia Hao, Jielan Li, Chunlei Yang, Wenjie Li, Ryota Tomioka, and
Tian Xie. A generative model for inorganic materials design. Nature, 639(8055):624–632, mar
2025.
[27] Tian Xie, Xiang Fu, Octavian-Eugen Ganea, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi S. Jaakkola. Crystal
diffusion variational autoencoder for periodic material generation. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2022.
[28] Youzhi Luo, Chengkai Liu, and Shuiwang Ji. Towards symmetry-aware generation of periodic
materials. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
11
[29] Anuroop Sriram, Benjamin Kurt Miller, Ricky T. Q. Chen, and Brandon M. Wood. FlowLLM:
Flow matching for material generation with large language models as base distributions. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[30] Xiaoshan Luo, Zhenyu Wang, Pengyue Gao, Jian Lv, Yanchao Wang, Changfeng Chen, and
Yanming Ma. Deep learning generative model for crystal structure prediction. npj Computational
Materials, 10(1):254, 11 2024.
[31] Hyunsoo Park, Anthony Onwuli, and Aron Walsh. Exploration of crystal chemical space using
text-guided generative artificial intelligence. ChemRxiv, 11 2024.
[32] Sherry Yang, Simon Batzner, Ruiqi Gao, Muratahan Aykol, Alexander L. Gaunt, Brendan Mc-
Morrow, Danilo J. Rezende, Dale Schuurmans, Igor Mordatch, and Ekin D. Cubuk. Generative
hierarchical materials search. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[33] OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2024.
[34] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
[35] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan
Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2023.
[36] Qianggang Ding, Santiago Miret, and Bang Liu. Matexpert: Decomposing materials discovery
by mimicking human experts. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[37] Shuyi Jia, Chao Zhang, and Victor Fung. LLMatDesign: Autonomous materials discovery with
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13163, 2024.
[38] Daniil A. Boiko, Robert MacKnight, Ben Kline, and Gabe Gomes. Autonomous chemical
research with large language models. Nature, 624(7992):570–578, 12 2023.
[39] Huan Zhang, Yu Song, Ziyu Hou, Santiago Miret, and Bang Liu. Honeycomb: A flexible
llm-based agent system for materials science. In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, 2024.
[40] Andres M. Bran, Sam Cox, Oliver Schilter, Carlo Baldassari, Andrew D. White, and Philippe
Schwaller. Augmenting large language models with chemistry tools. Nature Machine Intelli-
gence, 6(5):525–535, 5 2024.
[41] Rui Jiao, Wenbing Huang, Peijia Lin, Jiaqi Han, Pin Chen, Yutong Lu, and Yang Liu. Crystal
structure prediction by joint equivariant diffusion. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2023.
[42] Anubhav Jain, Shyue Ping Ong, Geoffroy Hautier, Wei Chen, William Davidson Richards,
Stephen Dacek, Shreyas Cholia, Dan Gunter, David Skinner, Gerbrand Ceder, and Kristin A.
Persson. Commentary: The materials project: A materials genome approach to accelerating
materials innovation. APL Materials, 1(1):011002, 07 2013.
[43] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop
on Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021.
[44] Daniel W. Davies, Keith T. Butler, Adam J. Jackson, Jonathan M. Skelton, Kazuki Morita, and
Aron Walsh. SMACT: Semiconducting materials by analogy and chemical theory. Journal of
Open Source Software, 4(38):1361, 2019.
[45] Cbfv. https://github.com/Kaaiian/CBFV.
[46] Keqiang Yan, Cong Fu, Xiaofeng Qian, Xiaoning Qian, and Shuiwang Ji. Complete and efficient
graph transformers for crystal material property prediction. In International conference on
Learning Representations, 2024.
12
A
Prompt templates
A.1
Prompt template for the Planning stage
Prompt template used during the Planning stage is shown in Fig. 5.
Figure 5: Prompt template for Planning stage. <target> and <current situation> are the variables.
Here, <current situation> includes historical information regarding previously selected tools and
how the material properties changed as a result of those selections.
A.2
Prompt templates for the Proposition stage
Different prompt templates are used in the Proposition stage depending on which tool was selected
during the Planning stage. The prompt template used when short-term memory is selected is shown
in Fig. 6. Similarly, the prompt templates used when long-term memory, periodic table, and materials
knowledge base are selected are shown in Fig. 7, 8, and 9, respectively.
A.3
Prompt template for feedback generation
A prompt template used in the Property Evaluation stage to generate feedback for the LLM is shown
in Fig. 10. This template is applied when the proposed composition is provided in a valid format. If
the composition is submitted in an unreadable or incorrect format—for example, if it includes invalid
element symbols or fractional subscripts—feedback instructing the LLM to resubmit the proposal
using the correct format is provided.
A.4
Prompt template for comparative experiments
Fig. 11 shows the prompt template used for having the LLM propose new compositions without
tool-assisted Planning and Proposition. In this case, the LLM receives feedback on the previously
proposed composition and, based on that feedback, returns a revised composition proposal.
A.5
Prompt template for observation generation
Fig. 12 shows the prompt template used for generating observation when one composition transitions
to another during the construction of the knowledge base.
13
Figure 6: Prompt template for the Proposition stage when short-term memory has been selected. The
template contains the following variables: <target>, <composition>, <property value>, and <short-
term memory>. The <short-term memory> contains information regarding recent composition
proposals, the reasoning behind those proposals, and the feedback received from the Property
Evaluator.
Figure 7: Prompt template for the Proposition stage when long-term memory has been selected.
The template contains the following variables: <target>, <composition>, <property value>, and
<long-term memory>. The <long-term memory> includes information on previous cases in which
material compositions leading to structures with properties close to the target were successfully
proposed, detailing the reasoning behind those proposals and the corresponding feedback received
from the Property Evaluator.
14
Figure 8: Prompt template for the Proposition stage when the periodic table has been selected.
The template contains the following variables: <target>, <composition>, <property value>, and
<elements>. The <elements> contains information about elements belonging to the same group
as those included in the previous proposal. For example, if a previous proposal contains Li and O,
<elements> will include Li: H, Na, K, Rb, Cs and O: S, Se, Te.
Figure 9: Prompt template for the Proposition stage when the materials knowledge base has been
selected. The template contains the following variables: <target>, <composition>, <property
value>, and <Information>. The <Information> includes insights into how material properties
change when compositions related to the previously proposed composition are modified, along with
observations explaining why these changes occur.
Figure 10: Template for feedback generation. The <property value> is a variable.
15
Figure 11: Prompt template for material composition proposal by the LLM without tool-assisted
Planning and Proposition. <target>, <composition>, and <property value> are variables.
Figure 12: Prompt template used to generate explanations of observations when transitioning from
one composition to another during the construction of the knowledge base. The variables are follows:
<source composition>, <source formula units>, <source property value>, <target composition>,
<target formula units>, and <target property value>.
B
Data distribution
Fig. 13 shows the distribution of formation energies in the MP-60 dataset. The dashed lines indicate
the values corresponding to the 1.0% (−3.8 eV/atom), 2.5% (−3.5 eV/atom), 10% (−3.0 eV/atom),
20% (−2.5 eV/atom), and 40% (−1.6 eV/atom) quantiles, calculated by sorting the formation energy
values in ascending order.
Figure 13: Distribution of formation energy per atom in MP-60 dataset.
16
C
Natural language integration to initialization: Towards
knowledge-informed materials design
In real-world materials exploration by domain experts, it is often preferable to begin with promising
initial compositions based on prior knowledge or intuition. To advance toward such a knowledge-
informed framework, we implemented two distinct methods for initializing compositions through
natural language: one where the LLM proposes an initial composition based on a provided prompt
(LLM-based sampling), leveraging its inherent chemical knowledge, and another that employs a
retriever trained to identify relevant compositions from a database using natural-language queries
(Retriever-based sampling).
In LLM-based sampling, the initial composition is proposed directly by the LLM. Specifically,
the LLM is prompted using a request in natural language, such as: "I am looking to design a
material with a formation energy per atom of <target> eV/atom. Could you suggest one possible
material composition?", where <target> denotes the target property value, specifically the desired
formation energy value. For the Retriever based sampling, we trained a Retriever using contrastive
learning[1], employing the T5[2] as a text encoder, following the approach introduced in MatExpert[3].
Specifically, we performed contrastive learning by encoding both the property descriptions and their
corresponding compositional descriptions (chemical formulas) of materials from the MP-20 dataset
using the T5 encoder. This enables the retriever to effectively select relevant initial compositions
based on natural-language queries describing desired material properties.
Figure 14: Comparison of three initialization methods (Random, LLM, Retriever). Target
formation energy was set to −3.8 eV/atom. a Average property values at each iteration across 20
independent runs. b Average of the property values closest to the target achieved up to each iteration,
calculated across 20 independent runs. c Success rates calculated at each iteration, averaged over
20 independent runs. d Compositional metrics (validity, uniqueness, novelty, and V.U.N. score) for
compositions identified as closest to the target.
Fig. 14 compares three different initialization methods used to reach a target formation energy of
−3.8 eV/atom. Fig. 14 a, b, and c show how the average property values evolve across iterations
averaged over 20 independent runs, the average of the closest property values to the target observed in
all preceding iterations, and the success rates over iterations, respectively. Finally, panel d summarizes
compositional metrics (validity, uniqueness, novelty, and the V.U.N. score) for the compositions
successfully identified as being close to the target value.
As shown in Fig. 14 a, both natural language-based initialization methods (LLM and Retriever)
demonstrated superior starting points compared to Random initialization, with initial property values
much closer to the target. The Retriever-based method, in particular, consistently provided initial
compositions with formation energies nearest to the target value. This advantageous starting point
enabled more focused exploration of the compositional space, leading to a significantly higher success
17
rate throughout the iterative process, as evidenced in Fig. 14 c. Furthermore, Fig. 14 d reveals that
compositions generated using the Retriever-based initialization achieve comparable V.U.N. score
compared to Random initialization, indicating superior overall quality of the generated materials.
These compelling results suggest that knowledge-informed initialization through natural language
queries can substantially improve both the efficiency and effectiveness of targeted materials design
while maintaining high compositional quality.
1. Chen, T., Kornblith, S., Norouzi, M. & Hinton, G. A simple framework for contrastive
learning of visual representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning (2020)
2. Raffel, C. et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text trans-
former. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 21 (2020).
3. Ding, Q., Miret, S. & Liu, B. Matexpert: Decomposing materials discovery by mimicking
human experts. In International Conference on Learning Representations (2025).
D
Element distribution
In Fig. 15, the left-column panels show elemental frequencies calculated from all proposed composi-
tions, while the right-column panels show frequencies calculated only from compositions identified
as closest to the target property. Rows one through four correspond to GPT-4o w/o tools, GPT-4o w/
tools, o3-mini w/o tools, and o3-mini w/ tools, respectively.
E
Contribution of each tool
To better understand the contribution of each individual tool, we conducted additional experiments
using GPT-4o, evaluating each tool separately, as shown in Table 1. Results suggest the knowledge
base contributes to proposing unique compositions with high success rates. Long-term memory
enhances compositional uniqueness and novelty, while the periodic table aids in exploring novel
elemental spaces.
Method
Comp.
validity
Comp.
uniqueness
Comp.
novelty
Num. of
elements
Success rate
w/o tools
0.95
0.60
0.25
13
0.25
w/ Short-term memory
0.95
0.85
0.60
19
0.30
w/ Long-term memory
0.90
1.00
0.85
25
0.25
w/ Periodic table
0.80
1.00
0.60
36
0.10
w/ Knowledge base
0.95
1.00
0.70
24
0.65
w/ tools
0.85
1.00
0.75
27
0.45
Table 1: Evaluation results for materials generated using each tool independently. The table
includes Performance metrics for different configurations: without tool-assisted Planning and Propo-
sition (w/o tools), with each tool used independently, and with tool-assisted Planning and Proposition
(w/ tools), where GPT-4o was used as the LLM backbone.
F
Reasoning examples
One of the key advantages of the proposed framework lies in its interpretability, which stems from
employing an LLM as the central reasoning engine. To investigate how the LLM reasons during
the materials design process, we analyzed concrete examples of the reasoning outputs generated
by the LLMs. Specifically, in the Planning stage, we collected the reasoning texts associated with
each selected tool, converted them into embedding representations using SciBERT[1], and applied
t-SNE[2] to project them into a two-dimensional space. The resulting visualization is shown in Fig.
16. As can be confirmed from Fig. 16, the embedding representations form distinct clusters, and the
k-means clustering was applied to the embedded reasoning representations. The color of each point
in the figure corresponds to its assigned cluster. To further interpret the characteristics of each cluster,
raw reasoning texts associated with points in each cluster are shown in Fig. 18 for GPT-4o and in Fig.
19 for o3-mini.
18
Figure 15: Elemental distributions of proposed compositions. Elemental distributions were
calculated from compositions proposed across 15 iterations in 20 independent runs targeting a
formation energy of -3.8 eV/atom. The left panels show frequencies from all proposed compositions;
the right panels show frequencies from compositions closest to the target. Rows one to four correspond
to GPT-4o w/o tools, GPT-4o w/ tools, o3-mini w/o tools, and o3-mini w/ tools, respectively.
Figure 16: t-SNE visualization of the embedding representations of reasoning texts generated by the
LLM during the Planning stage for GPT-4o and o3-mini. Each point represents a reason associated
with a selected tool, and the colors indicate clusters obtained via k-means clustering.
19
Figure 17: t-SNE visualization of the embedding representations of reasoning texts generated by the
LLM during the Proposition stage for GPT-4o and o3-mini. Each point represents a reason associated
with a selected tool, and the colors indicate clusters obtained via k-means clustering
By examining the reasoning texts within each cluster in Fig. 18 and Fig. 19, it becomes evident that
each cluster corresponds to a specific tool selected by the LLM, indicating that the reasoning patterns
are correlated with tool choice. Additionally, in Fig. 18, when the knowledge base is selected, the
reasoning texts are further divided into two distinct clusters (purple Cluster 2 and gray Cluster 6).
The texts in the gray cluster suggest that the LLM selected the knowledge base again based on prior
experience, where using it previously led to successful outcomes. A similar trend was also observed
for o3-mini as well. These results suggest that the LLM selects tools by taking past outcomes into
account, demonstrating experience-informed decision-making.
A similar analysis conducted for the Proposition stage is shown in Fig. 17. Unlike in the Planning
stage, the reasoning texts associated with composition proposals in the Proposition stage did not
form clearly separatable clusters in the t-SNE analysis. This is likely because tool selection is a task
involving a choice among four fixed options, whereas composition proposal is a more flexible task.
For both GPT-4o and o3-mini, Fig. 20 and Fig. 21 show randomly selected reasoning texts from each
region obtained by k-means clustering in the t-SNE space. Upon examining the reasoning texts, it
was observed that texts containing words such as "substitution" or "replace" tend to be embedded in
nearby regions. Although the physical and chemical correctness of the reasoning is not guaranteed
in this study, it was observed that the LLM provides explanations using relevant keywords such as
types of chemical bonding (e.g., ionic or covalent bonds), electronegativity, and atomic affinity. By
further refining these explanations and improving their reliability, LLMs have the potential to provide
valuable insights that human experts can interpret and effectively leverage in the materials design
process.
1. Beltagy, I., Lo, K. & Cohan, A. Scibert: Pretrained language model for scientific text. In
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (2019).
2. van der Maaten, L. & Hinton, G. Visualizing data using t-sne. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 9,
2579–2605 (2008).
20
Figure 18: Examples of reasoning texts generated by GPT-4o during the Planning stage. For each
cluster shown in Fig. 16, three reasoning examples were randomly selected from the points belonging
to that cluster.
G
Element distribution under different constraints
Figure 22 a illustrates the elemental distributions without any additional constraints, while panels
b–d present the results obtained under specific constraints. Each distribution represents the ratio
of elements contained in the proposed compositions generated by the LLM, aggregated over 10
independent runs—each consisting of 15 iterations, using GPT-4o as the LLM backbone. For the
generation experiments, the target property values were set to −3.8 eV/atom for unconstrained
generation and constrained generation under Constraints 1 and 2, while Constraint 3 had a target
property value of −2.5 eV/atom.
21
Figure 19: Examples of reasoning texts generated by o3-mini during the Planning stage. For each
cluster shown in Fig. 16, three reasoning examples were randomly selected from the points belonging
to that cluster.
22
Figure 20: Examples of reasoning texts generated by GPT-4o during the Proposition stage. For each
cluster shown in Fig. 17, three reasoning examples were randomly selected from the points belonging
to that cluster.
23
Figure 21: Examples of reasoning texts generated by o3-mini during the Proposition stage. For each
cluster shown in Fig. 17, three reasoning examples were randomly selected from the points belonging
to that cluster.
24
Figure 22: Comparison of elemental distributions explored by the framework under different
additional prompts. a Elemental distribution without any additional constraints. b Elemental
distribution under the constraint excluding Pb, Hg, Cd, and Cr. c Elemental distribution under the
constraint excluding actinides elements. d Elemental distribution under the constraint restricting
compositions to non-metallic elements only.
25